

Internal validity


















Other sources of bias
Cointerventions constant
Blinding of investigators?
Intent to treat analysis
Incomple outcome assessment
Blinding (Participant)
Incomplete outcome data addressed? - dropouts
Baseline imbalance
Description and standardisation of outcome measures
Standardised protocols for information delivery?
Is it clear that the order of receiving treatment was randomised?
Intention-to-Treat Analysis
Are there concerns that the target condition as defined by the reference standard does not match the question?
Blinding (Outcome Assessor)
Was the study powered to detect differences in outcomes.
Intervention effect specified
Blinding of assessors?
Treatment fidelity
Study size
Selective reporting
Blinding of outcome assessors (detection bias): infections
Representative intervention group?
Reliable primary outcomes
Timing of the outcome assessment similar?
Ascertainment of exposure
Incomplete outcome data (attrition bias): diet acceptability
Complete follow up of all trials?
B) Allocation concealment (selection bias)
Susceptibility to bias reduced?
Funding by commercial organisation avoided?
Other baseline variables (All studies)
Sponsoring precluded
No bias due to baseline comparability of treatment and control groups
Free from baseline imbalance?
No bias due to source of funding?
Justification of outcomes
Exposure ascertainment, including same method for cases and controls
Non-response rate
Selection criteria reported?
Intention-to-treat (ITT) analysis?
Identical care
Comparability of intervention and control group characteristics at baseline
Comparability of groups at pre-test
Possible confounders controlled for in the analysis
Sequence of tests determined at random?
Blinded assessor
Blinding of participants (subjective outcomes)
Inclusion/exclusion criteria clearly defined
Losses to follow-up
Adequate protection against contamination?
Definition of positive and negative findings clearly defined?
Incomplete outcome data addressed (ITS)?
Compliance acceptable in all groups?
Data analysed appropriately (ITS)
Free of other bias (ITS) ?
Powercalculation performed?
Free of selective outcome reporting?
22. Selection bias (time)
Selection method random or consecutive
If a threshold was used, was it pre-specified?
Incomplete outcome data (ITT analysis)
Loss of clusters
Incomplete outcome data addressed (ITS) ?
Balance in baseline characteristics?
Free attrition bias?
Intention to treat?
Relevant inclusion criteria (FSS score entry criteria)
Clearly concealed allocation + trial size > 49 + drop-out max 15%
Baseline outcome measurements
Free of surgical learning curve bias?
Statistics reporting
Selection bias (baseline imbalances)?
Population based study?
Selection bias
Contamination protection (Trials)
Implementation of intervention
Cross-over design suitable for condition?
Blinding of study subjects?
Adequate validity and reliability of outcome measures?
Free from follow up bias?
Is the reference standards likely to correctly classify the target condition?
Selective recruitment of participants
Representative study group
Follow up and exclusions
Blinded assessment of primary outcome(s) (protection against detection bias)
Intention-to-treat?
Dropouts reported
Recruitment bias addressed?
C) Blinding (patient)
Intervention unlikely to affect data collection?
Completeness of data set (ITS)
Intervention had no effect on data collection
Size
Degree of certainty that the participants have LS
Intention to treat Analysis
Early stopping?
Reliable primary outcome measure(s)
Free of differential expertise bias?
sample size
Follow-up?
Baseline data
Outcome assessor blinding?
Control for methodological differences, i.e. completeness of follow up
Sufficient description of reference test?
Comparability of groups on basis of design or analysis
Blinded outcome assessment (healing)
Comparable baseline characteristics
Group similarity at baseline
Control for methodological differences, i.e. double-blinding
Homogeneous at baseline?
Blinding of the patient?
Allocation: sequence generation
Could the conduct or interpretation of the index test have introduced bias?
Intention to Treat Analysis
Reference test execution described?
IS THE STUDY AT LOW RISK OF BIAS?
Blinding of outcome assessment (safety outcomes);detection bias
Detection adequate?
Protected from contamination?
Controlled clinical trial?
17. Follow-up
Baseline CD4 count (All studies)
Intention-to-treat
Baseline outcome measurements similar
Blinding of participants
Contamination of experimental groups
Selective reporting and other sources of bias
MERGE Criteria Score
Appropriate Sampling (clustering)
Blinding of participants/personnel (safety outcomes);performance bias
Intention-to-treat/Drop-outs?
Similar baseline characteristics?
Baseline outcomes measurements
Masking outcome assessors (detection bias)
Blinding of outcome assessor (detection bias): diet acceptability
Representativeness of the cases
Did authors adjust for baseline differences in their analyses?
Free of other bias - was the timing of the outcome assessment similar in all groups?
Detection Bias
Representative sample?
Assessment of outcome
Blinding of physicians
Blinding of participants/personnel (efficacy outcomes);performance bias
Equivalent Control Site
Timing of outcome assessment similar in all groups
Methods of analysis adequate for cluster randomised trials
Shape of effect pre-specified (ITS) ?
Were the study groups comparable at baseline?
Blinded outcome assessor
Early stopping
Adjustment important confounders
Selection of the controls
Compliance with primary intervention
Baseline similarity
Free of retrospective selection bias?
Low risk of detection bias?
Confounders
Free from confounding treatment(s)
Comparability of groups on different prognostic characteristics
Contemporaneous data collection (CBA studies only)?
Component study identification
F) Incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
Blinded assessment of outcomes (ITS)
Follow-up of professionals
Did the study avoid inappropriate exclusions?
Free from bias due to blocked randomisation
Access to individual patient data
Outcome measures used valid and reliable?
Care program identical
Blinding of healthcare provider?
Incomplete outcome data addressed? ITT
Intention to treat analysis
Appropriate control
Intervention independent of other changes?
Blinded Assessors
Baseline Outcomes similar?
Intention to treat
Reliable primary outcome measure?
Duration of follow-up?
25. Adjustment for confounding
Shape of effect pre-specified
AAO-HNS criteria used for the diagnosis of Meniere's disease?
Baseline profile: Corticosteroid use
Blinding of participants and investigators.
Protection from contamination?
Pharmaceutical funding?
Similar outcomes measured
Withdrawals > 10%
Order of treatments randomized?
Cohort: follow-up length and adequacy (including loss to follow up)
Free of source of funding
Measurement bias
Free of blocked randomisation bias
Blinding - Operator/sedationist
Blinding of healthcare providers
Adequate control group
Two or more assessed quality and conducted data extraction
Cointerventions Constant
Other: anything else
Representative ultra-radical surgery group?
Intervention is independent of other changes?
Blinding participants
Extra performance bias (care programmes and surgical experience, etc.)
Blinding of participants (objective outcomes)
Well defined follow-up
Outcome description
Intention-to-treat analysis performed?
Free of Academic bias?
Incorrect analysis
Reliable primary outcome measures
Missing values >10%
OVERALL
Assessment of carry-over effects?
Baseline measurement (RCT / CCT)
Reliable ascertainment of falls/fallers outcome
CC-Comparability
Baseline comparability demonstrated
analysis of intention-to-treat
Similar outcome timing
CC-Case Selection
Compliance with interventions
Could the reference standard, its conduct, or its interpretation have introduced bias?
Free of other bias? - were groups similar at baseline regarding the most important prognostic factors?
23. Randomization
Masking (performance bias and detection bias)
Co-intervention
Baseline measurements
Selection of the non exposed cohort
Relevant clinical information?
Random sequence generation?
Representative comparison group
Free of Incorporation Bias
Blinding of outcome assessors
Baseline outcomes
Follow up of participants
Masking of participants and personnel (performance bias)
Was a case-control design avoided?
Was the diagnosis of heart failure defined and appropriate?
Assessment blinding
Absence of large or differential losses to follow up?
Blinding (objective outcomes: drop out, use of substances measured by urine analysis)
Duration of follow-up
Adequate patient description
Was there an acceptable pre-randomisation dropout?
ITT Analysis?
Selective recruitment of participants addressed?
Case-control: nonresponse rate
Free of selection bias (from imbalances at baseline)?
Free of academic bias?
Similar baseline outcome measurements
Compliance
Blinding of personnel?
Selection of exposure (and comparison) groups for non randomised studies (selection bias)
Blinded assessment of primary outcome
2 control and 2 intervention groups
Blinding of outcome assessor?
Comparability of cases and controls on the basis of the design or analysis
Knowledge of allocated interventions adequately prevented during the study
Blinding - outcome assessors?
Baseline measurement?
Prospective study?
Incomplete Outcome Assessment
Balanced at baseline?
Attrition: incomplete outcome data
Intervention independent (ITS)?
Groups balanced at baseline?
Allocation concealment (Trials)
Comparable groups?
Allocation to intervention/control (selection bias)(For non randomised and CBA studies)
Representative spectrum?
Protection against exclusion or selection bias
Intention-to-treat-analysis
Outcome assessors blinded to treatment allocation
Free of conflict of interest?
Free of systematic differences in baseline characteristics of groups compared?
Incomplete outcome data (attrition bias): overall survival
Blinding of analysts
Concealment of Allocation
Randomisation?
High quality study?
Demonstration that the outcome of interest was not present at start of study
Imbalance of outcome measures at baseline addressed?
Publication ascertained through personal contact with investigators or sponsor?
Reliability of outcome measures used
No contamination between treatment groups?
Baseline measurement of outcome measures
Eligibility criteria
Appropriate analysis (secular trends taken into account)
K) Acceptable compliance
Withdrawals >10%
Withdrawals explained?
Clinician blinding
Random sequence generation (Trials)
Masking of outcome assessment (detection bias)
Protection against contamination - Studies using second site as control
Blinding (participant)
14. Blinding (subjects)
J) Similar or avoided co-interventions
No pharma sponsorshiip
Blinding outcome assessor
Use of blinding
Co-intervention or contamination?
Was compliance acceptable in all groups?
Comprehensive search
Concurrent control
Incorporation avoided?
Baseline characteristics similar
Contamination
Surgeons were experienced with trial operations?
Masking of laboratory assessment (Primary outcome)
Attention bias: equal amounts of attention to all groups (obligatory treatment components)?
Trial size > 49?
Detection bias
Method of analysis
Other quality indicators
Method of Blinding described?
Funding for the screening test
Overall risk of bias?
Shape of the intervention effects pre-specified
Details of assignment of patients reported?
Intervention likely to affect data collection (protection against detection bias) (ITS)
Bilateral knee replacements included
Blinding (objective outcomes)?
Missing values > 10%
Overall risk of bias
co-interventions
Carry-over effect?
Reporting of timing of patients that relapsed?
Free of selective reporting (adverse outcomes)
Risk of detection bias?
Adherence to the intention-to-treat principle
Definition of the controls
Randomization method
Blinding (performance bias) - care givers
Reliable Primary outcome measure
Selective reporting?
Credible Placebo
Conclusions substantiated
Was the trial free of source of funding bias?
Protection against contamination (RCT / CCT)
ethical approval
Non-industry funded
Rates of follow up
Conflict of interest
Blinding of carers?
Sponsoring precluded?
Funding from a source without financial conflict of interest?
Groups measured at baseline?
Intervention shape?
Blinding of care providers
Clear inclusion and exclusion criteria?
Expertise of imaging tests readers reported?
Baseline imbalance? (Was the study free of baseline imbalance?)
Reliability of primary outcome measurements
Adequate follow up?
Adequacy of HIT monitoring
Inappropiate influence of sponsor prevented?
Comparability of intervention and control group characteristics at baseline addressed?
H) Selective reporting (reporting bias)
Free from other bias?
Sample criteria
Comparability of cases and controls
Randomisation method reported
Blinding of participants?
Intervention unlikely to affect / bias data collection?
Case definition and representativeness
Adequate adjustment for confounders
Data collection (Cohorts)
Blinded assessment of outcomes (CBA)
Funding by non-profit organisation?
Intervention independent of other changes - ITS
Free of partial verification bias
Comparability of groups?
19. Compliance
Data collection
Incomplete data outcome reported?
Shape of effect pre-specified (ITS)?
No loss of clusters bias
Blinding of the outcome assessor
Assessments of outcomes
Blinding - participants?
Similarity of baseline characteristics
Multicentre study?
Study adequately protected against contamination?
Free of other bias? Funding
Baseline measurement (CBA)
CC-Exposure
Assessment of adherence to intervention?
Free of dietary differences other than fat?
Shape of intervention effect pre-specified
Incomplete outcome data addressed?(adverse outcomes)
No baseline imbalance between groups
Methods of analysis adequate for cluster-randomised trials
Selective outcome reporting?
Results based on "data dredging"?
Intervention unlikely to affect data collection
Protection from contamination
Similar at baseline
Appropriate statistical test use?
Description of Withdrawals and Drop outs?
Source of funding stated?
Follow-up (RCT / CCT)
Individuals as unit of analysis?
Was the case definition adequate?
Comparability of patients at baseline and follow-up (continuous data)
Group equivalence
Could the selection of patients have introduced bias?
Provider blinded?
Incomplete outcome data (attrition bias): duration of empirical antibiotics and antimycotics
Blinding (subjective outcomes)?
Valid outcomes
Were the groups similar at baseline regarding the most important prognostic factors?
Other
Double-dummy technique used?
Baseline imbalance?
Protocol Deviation balanced?
Were the reference standard results for rifampicin resistance detection interpreted without knowledge of the results of the index test?
Scans read blind to clinical information?
Similar baseline outcome measures?
Summary Assessment of Bias
Matched characteristics for control study sites
Outcome assessor blinding
Incomplete data
Other Potential Threats to Validity
groups similar at baseline
Free of differential verification bias
Verification of smoking cessation?
Adequate blinding of physicians/physical therapists?
intention to treat analysis?
Free of selective reporting
Academic bias
Sponsor bias
Baseline outcome measures similar
Recruitment bias
Baseline comparability
Relevant assignment criteria
Patient selection bias (Cohorts)
Timing of outcome assessment
Free from baseline imbalance bias?
Attrition bias
Clear definition of positive result?
Blinding? outcome assessors
Co interventions avoided or similar?
Attrition and right censoring less than 15% (continuous data)
Adequate adjustment for confounding in the analyses?
Demonstration that outcome of interest was not present at start of study
Duration
Free of performance bias (from non-trial differences in care provision)?
Permission or standardisation of concomitant treatments
Care provider blinding?
Free of other potential confounders?
Blinding of investigators that implemented the intervention
Blinding of the participant
Analyses adjust for different lengths of follow up of workers?
Total
Risk of bias overall?
Baseline outcome measurements similar?
Reliability of outcome measures
Reliable outcome measure
Representativeness of study cohort
Blinding of data assessors?
Dropout acceptable?
Attrition
Withdrawals & dropouts
Partial verification avoided?
Free of other sources of bias (performance bias)
Co-intervention avoided or similar?
Blinding of patients (performance bias)
Reliable outcome measures?
Drug identity, source, dose, duration of treatments, and adequacy of instructions
Completeness of follow up
Baseline measurement
Care providers blinded?
Method of Randomisation described?
Risk of attrition bias?
Blinding of outcome assessment (detection bias) (Patient satisfaction, health status).
Drop outs (%) > 10
Free of loss of clusters
Same method of ascertainment for cases and controls
Masking study personnel (performance bias)
Correct analyses for cross-over design used
Analysed appropriately (ITS) ?
Baseline assessments
Were co-interventions avoided or similar?
Recruitments of participants over the same time period?
Blinding - Patient
Adequate study inclusion process
No signs of variance inequality or skewness?
Co-interventions avoided or similar
Outcome assessment
16. Retrospective unplanned subgroup analyses
Blinding - Outcome Assessors
Outcome
Comparative care?
Intention-to-treat analysis (pain)?
PCS/RCS-Selection Exposed cohort
Follow-up for live birth rate
ITT analysis or 100% follow-up?
Blinding clinicians
Drop-outs
Aims/interventions and outcomes clear
Bias due to missing data
Comparanility of intervention and control group characteristics at baseline
Protection against contamination (CBA)
Blinding of participants and personnel (LABA+TIO versus TIO) (performance bias)
Randomisation method
Treatment withheld until both index test and reference standard were performed?
Intervention independent
Ethical approval obtained?
Patient compliance monitored and reported at at least 85%?
Free of selection bias?
24. Allocation concealment
Appropriate design?
Recruitments of participants from the same population?
Allocation: sequence concealment
Free from sponsor bias?
Blinding of patients
Blinding of outcome assessors (detection bias) - ITS
Free of baseline imbalance bias?
Sequence generation
Reliable primary outcome?
Financial support for trial or trialists?
Acceptable delay between tests?
Blinding of outcome assessors (detection bias): time to first febrile episode
Incomplete outcome data assessed?
Incomplete outcome data?
Adherence to treatment
Comparability of treatment groups?
Complete description of baseline characteristics?
ITT - was it performed?
Measure against contamination
From from early stopping bias?
Baseline similar?
Free of conflicts of interest
Free of extreme baseline imbalance?
Randomised intervention assignment concealed?
Was the follow-up long enough for the outcomes to occur?
Additional information from authors?
Intention-to-treat-analysis?
Blinded assessors
Funding
compliance with intervention
Withdrawals or dropouts?
Control selection and definition; nonexposed cohort selection
Certainty of diagnosis
Outcome assessment (cohort study): method and evidence outcome not present at study start
Overall assessment
Study duration
M) Study acceptable or flawed
Other potential sources of bias
Missing data
Characteristics similar at baseline?
Other bias: Representativeness of exposed cohort
Were the index test results interpreted without knowledge of the results of the reference standard?
Less than 25% lost to follow-up?
Allocation sequence generation
A) Adequate randomisation
Sufficient sample
Did all patients receive the same reference standard?
Intention-to-treat analysis (function)?
Were MUPS assessed with validated instruments?
Surgeon's experience reported
Selection of controls
Similar groups at baseline?
Blinding of health care providers (performance bias)
No contamination?
Reporting of participants by allocation group?
Adequate classification of outcomes
Completeness of follow-up?
Incomplete outcome data (attrition bias): time to first febrile episode
Assessment of compliance?
Consecutive patients in the study group?
Characteristics at baseline similar?
Was the study reported according to CONSORT guidelines?
Independent Funding Source
Study free from selective outcome reporting? (reporting bias)
Co-interventions avoided?
Protection against Detection Bias
Intervention independent of other changes (ITS only)
Treatment groups comparable?
21. Selection bias (population)
Intention-to-treat (ITT) analysis
Loss to Follow-up explained?
Free of early stopping?
Multi-level data structure dealt with?
Similarity at Baseline
Rationale for sample size
Representative comparison group?
Blinding of data analysers?
Timing of the outcome assessment similar in all groups?
Unlikely to affect data collection (ITS) ?
Was the outcome assessor blinded?
co-interventions avoided or similar?
Adequate follow-up?
Sample size
Was the timing of the outcome assessment comparable in all groups?
Presence of power calculation
Unbiased data available?
Study selection
Implementation Integrity
Objective outcomes?
Selective Outcome Reporting
How allocation occurred
Outcome measures validated?
I) Baseline similarities
Baseline measures
Compliance to treatment assessed
Baseline profile: Anticholingeric use
Free of other sources of bias?
Baseline characteristic measurements
Baseline Characteristics
Randomized design? If cross over design, order of presentation of the different formats randomized?
Control for co-interventions
Performance and detection: blinding
Randomised controlled trial?
Orbit classification
Data collection methods?
Free from academic bias?
Was the surveillance active, and of clinically appropriate duration (i.e. at least 3 months post intervention)?
Compliance with recommendation reliable?
Blinding (detection bias) - outcome assessor
Comparability of exercise and control group at entry
Adequate follow-up response
Groups balanced at baseline
Knowledge of the allocated interventions adequately prevented during the study
Total risk of bias: A (low), B (moderate/unclear), or C (high)
Summary Assessment?
Free of detection bias (from e.g. differences in follow-up procedures)?
Complete follow-up assessment
Use and appropriateness of statistical analyses where tabulated data could not be extracted from the original publication
Completeness of follow-up
OVERALL RISK OF BIAS
Allegiance effect improbable?
Planned analysis
Subjects randomised to intervention groups?
Shape of intervention effect specified (ITS)
Similar timing of outcome assessment?
Co-interventions
Evidence that the criteria has been met
Baseline Characteristics?
Intervention unlikely to affect data collection - ITS
Shape of the intervention prespecified (ITS only)
Free of baseline imbalance?
Blinding of outcome assessment (detection bias) (reoperation, treatment failure, range of motion)
Summary assessments
Validated score used
Timing of outcome assessments
Specified eligibility criteria
Selective reporting (reporting bias) - ITS
Blinding? providers
Intervention independent of other changes
Data on observer variation reported and within acceptable range?
Free of Sponsorship bias?
Free drug company bias?
Study protected against contamination
Complete follow up?
Comparability of groups
Participant blinding?
Funding source? (was the trial funding independent and not likely to influence trial results).
Reliable outcome measurement (ITS)
Patient blinding?
Withdrawals and drop-outs
Baseline differences
Co-interventions (All studies)
Timing of outcome assessment similar?
Vitamin C and placebo indistinguishable?
Inception cohort?
Blinding of Outcome Assessment
Intervention unlikely to affect data collection (ITS only)
Outcome assessment blinded?
Reliability and sensitivity
Masking of study participants (performance bias)
Similar follow-up time?
Was the study free of potential bias from the funding source?
Losses to follow-up taken into account?
Confounders?
Blinding of participants and personnel
Blinding (performance bias) - participants
Appropriate choice of controls (CBA studies only)?
Personnel blinding?
similar outcome timing
Incomplete outcome reporting: intention-to-treat analysis performed?
Influence of co-interventions
Treatment arm size
Grading: AAO-HNS diagnosis
Blinded clinical operator
Well defined study group
Sample characteristics
Intervention integrity
Reliability of outcome measurement (RCT / CCT)
High risk of bias?
Losses to follow up taken into account?
Reliability/quality of Outcome Measures
Comparability with individually randomised trials
Low risk of attrition bias?
Other changes
Power calculation?
Performance: blinding during study
Assessor blinding?
Adequate selection criteria
Baseline outcome measurement
Blinding? patients
Performance bias
Blinding of subjective outcomes?
Discontinuation of previous treatments
CC-Control Selection
Identical care programmes?
Baseline outcome characteristics similar
Other sources of bias?
Adequate length follow-up?
Randomisation Method
Group similar at baseline
Definitions and measurements of outcomes
PCS/RCS-Assessment of Oucome
Blinding (RCT / CCT)
Treatment/control groups comparative at entry
Low risk of selection bias?
External validity
Complete sample of trials
Adequate matching of intervention / control groups?
Power calculations
Sample size calculation reported
Performance bias (care programme discrepancies)?
ITT analysis
Addressing incomplete data <20%
Other bias: representativeness of exposed cohort
Free of other bias
Independent intervention?
Groups received same intervention?
Knowledge of the allocation adequately prevented(ITS)?
Characteristics for studies using second site as control (CBA) or Concealment of allocation(CCTs)
Funding source
Analyses adjust for different lengths of follow-up of workers?
Overall assessment of bias risk
Adequate concealment of allocation
Reporting of losses of follow-up
Blinding of anaesthesiologists?
Internal validity: confounding and selection bias
Masking of data analyzers
Masking of study personnel (performance bias)
Timing outcome assessments similar?
Trial sponsorship
Detection bias (biochemical validation of smoking outcomes)
Appropriateness of duration of surveillance
Blinding pathologist
Inclusion criteria
Blinding of personnel (performance bias)
Follow-up ≧ 1 year
Free of attrition bias?
ITT analysis?
Masking of participants (performance bias)
Baseline factors comparable
Trials according to risk of bias
Explicit inclusion criteria
Reporting bias
Incomplete follow-up outcome data addressed?
Baseline measurements comparable?
Other risks of bias
Implementation integrity
Selection bias (imbalance in baseline characteristics)
Blinding of intervention  providers
Reliable primary outcome
Ascertainment of intervention
Other bias - ITS
Representative standard surgery group?
Comparability of groups at baseline
Reliable primary outcome measures?
Use of non-inferiority design and methods
Masking of outcome assessors (detection bias)
Could the patient flow have introduced bias?
Attrition Bias
Free from academic bias (assessed from primary author)?
Randomized design? If cross-over design, order of presentation of the different formats randomized?
Free of detection bias?
Blinding of outcome assessors (detection bias): duration of empirical antibiotics or antimycotics
Intervention independent (ITS) ?
PCS/RCS-Selection Non Exposed cohort
Washout
Ethics committee approval and informed consent for participation?
Appropriate statistics
Was the patient blinded?
Free from financial conflict of interest?
Free of early stopping
Control for confounding
Free of selected reporting (ITS) ?
Other causes for high risk of bias
Blinding method
No funding by commercial organisation?
Free of other bias? - was the timing of the outcome assessment similar in all groups?
D) Blinding (care provider)
Reason for number of points pre- and post-intervention (ITS)
Data collection methods valid and reliable?
Comparability of cohorts
G) Randomised participants analysed in their groups (reporting bias)
Validity/reliability of outcome measures
Were the treatment and control group comparable at entry?
Eligibility Criteria
Is the case definition adequate?
Follow-up of patients
Analysed appropriately (ITS)?
Baseline imbalances addressed?
Blinding - Outcome assessor
Completeness of (follow up) data?
Global risk of bias?
Analysis by intention-to-treat
Knowledge of allocated intervention adequate (Process variables)
Free of academic bias
Adequate blinding of patients?
Follow-up of patients/caregivers (CBA)
Selection of the non-exposed cohort
Representativeness of the exposed cohort
Was the withdrawal/drop-out rate described, acceptable (<20%), and comparable in both groups?
Outcome Reporting
Randomization?
No loss of cluster bias
Blinding of the investigator
Baseline similarity?
Blinding outcome assessors?
Index test results blinded?
Loss to follow-up
Important prognostic indicators at baseline
Other bias: Selection of comparison cohort
Blinding of care provider
Outcomes reported
Can it be assumed that the trial was not biased from carry over effects?
Was a consecutive or random sample of patients enrolled?
Adequate protection against contamination
Blinding (subjective outcomes: use of substances as measured by self report, side effects)
Blinded to assessors
Intention-to-treat analysis - was it performed?
Adequacy of follow up of cohorts?
Consecutive patients in the control group?
Characteristics for studies using second site as control
Blinded assessment of primary outcomes
Accurate classifications of outcomes?
Pharmaceutical company involvement
Balanced baseline characteristics?
Timing of outcome
Missing data on primary interventions/outcomes
Comparability of intervention and comparison group
Randomisation adequately described/protected?
Was the drop-out rate described and acceptable?
Allocated intervention
Incomplete outcome data (attrition bias): infections
Knowledge of the interventions adequately prevented during the study?
Assignment of patients to treatment groups
Prospective design?
Prospective
Control for clinical differences in the participants
Incomplete outcome data addressed? (Post-treatment)
Allocation bias
Two or more agreed on inclusion
Intervention compliance?
Free of contamination?
Cramp diary (recall bias)
Free of other bias? - as specified in the description
Intervention dependent of other changes (protection against secular trends) (ITS)
Shape of the intervention effect pre-specified?
Free of early stopping bias?
Shape of the intervention
Blinding of participants and personnel (LABA+TIO versus LABA) (performance bias)
15. Blinding (outcome assessors)
Representative palliative surgery group?
Selection criteria described?
Baseline response
Grading: AAO-HNS outcome measurement
Was there an appropriate interval between index test and reference standard?
Selective outcome reporting
Credible placebo
Contamination protection (contamination bias)
Overall low risk of bias?
Large Cohort 
Blinding (assessor)
Definition of abstinence
Protection against changes
Randomization
Low risk of performance bias?
Study adequately protected against contamination? (performance bias)
Compliance/ adherence assessed?
Sample size calculation
Specification of inclusion and exclusion criteria?
18. Statistical tests
Confounding
Sequence generation.
Timing of the outcome assessment across groups
Selective recruitment of participants (cluster RCTs)
Reporting: unreported outcomes
Definition of controls
Other Bias
Free from financial conflict of interest
Randomized intervention assignment concealed?
Follow up of patients
Free of baseline imbalance
Were the reference standard results for TB detection interpreted without knowledge of the results of the index test?
ITT-analysis
Baseline assessment of the participants
Sufficient description of index tests?
Summary Assessment of Bias?
Blinding of assessment of subjective outcomes
E) Blinding (outcome assessor)
L) Similar outcome assessment
Sample calculation?
Second site comparable?
Baseline characteristics similar (selection bias)
Reasons given for number of points pre and post (ITS)
Control for clinical differences in the interventions
Free of systematic difference in care?
Well defined outcome
Risk of bias due to confounding (For non randomised and CBA studies)
Timing of outcome assessments similar?
Main problems with the trial as perceived by this analysis
Well defined risk estimation
Physicians blinded
Equal treatment of different groups
Free of source of funding bias
Shape of Intervention effect pre-specified - ITS
Duration of Follow-up 6 months or more
Blinded review of CT/MRI-scans?
Attempts to balance groups
Acceptable reference standard?
Number of points specified
Baseline data reported?
Described as double-blind?
Concealment of allocation (RCT / CCT)
Intention-to-treat/Drop-outs
Blinding of outcome assessor (detection bias): quality of life
Source of funding bias
Comparability?
Other bias: Ascertainment of exposure
Groups comparable at baseline?
Baseline equality
Free of incorrect analysis
Free of other bias - were groups similar at baseline regarding the most important prognostic indicators?
Adjustment for non-response
Awareness of monitored usage?
Overall bias
Was use of a cross over design appropriate?
The shape of intervention pre-specified?
Independent Assessment of causation (detection bias)
Baseline characteristics
Baseline profile: β2 agonist use
Blinding of outcome assessment (efficacy outcomes);detection bias
Incomplete outcome data adequately addressed (attrition bias)
Timing of outcome assessment similar in all groups?
Intention to Treat analysis?
Placebo washout
Reliable outcome measurement (CBA)
Data collection unaffected?
Are there concerns that the included patients and setting do not match the review question?
Randomisation
20. Outcome measures
Free from performance bias?
Index test execution described?
power calculation
Detection: blind outcome assessment
Certainty of AD
Objective outcome?
Unlikely to affect data collection (ITS)?
No bias due to early stopping?
Follow-up of professionals (protection against exclusion bias)
Control for bias
Provider blinding
Drop rate described and acceptable?
Patient blinding
Overall assessment of risk of bias
Groups similar at baseline?
Similar baseline characteristics
Blinding of assessor?
Baseline comparability?
Differential verification avoided?
Representative intervention group
Baseline outcome measurement similar?
Adequate baseline response
Appropriate Analysis
Reliable primary outcome measure
Comparability of cohorts on the basis of the design or analysis
Reference standard results blinded?
Validity of outcomes for context
Other bias: Selection of non-exposed cohort?
Loss to follow up
Imbalance of outcome measures at baseline
Baseline outcome measurements similar (selection bias)
Non response rate
Exposed cohort: representativeness
Free of recruitment bias
26. Incomplete outcome data
Are there concerns that the index test, its conduct, or interpretation differ from the review question?
Early stopping of trial
Washout?
Protection against contamination (intervention and controls)
Severity of AD
Were all patients included in the analysis?
Blinding of care providers?
Diagnostic criteria
Data collection methods
Specification of primary outcome?
Adequacy of follow-up of the cohorts
Treatment adherence?
Explicit in-/exclusion criteria
Incomplete outcome data (attrition bias): quality of life
Incomplete outcome data (attrition bias) - ITS
PCS/RCS-Comparability
Masking of periodontal outcome assessor
Blinding of outcome assessors (detection bias)
Free of performance bias?