JOURNAL OF ENDOUROLOGY
Volume 16, Number 1, February 2002
© Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.

Office-Based Transurethral Microwave Thermotherapy Using
the TherMatrx TMx-2000
DAVID M. ALBALA, M.D.,1 BRANT R. FULMER, M.D.,1 THOMAS M.T. TURK, M.D.,1
FERNANDO KOLESKI, M.D.,1 GERALD ANDRIOLE, M.D.,2 BRADLEY E. DAVIS, M.D.,3
GREGG R. EURE, M.D.,4 JOHN N. KABALIN, M.D.,5 JAMES E. LINGEMAN, M.D.,6
JOSEPH NUZZARELLO, M.D.,7 and CHANDRU SUNDARAM, M.D.2

ABSTRACT
Background and Purpose: <tx>Transurethral microwave thermotherapy</tx>
(TUMT) is an effective therapy for symptomatic benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), but the trade-off between the magnitude of clinical improvement
and side effects and patient tolerance has limited its appeal to patients and urologists. This study, using the
TherMatrx TMx-2000, a TUMT device that directly heats the transition zone to greater than 50ºC, has been
focused on resolving these issues and developing a truly office-based therapy that is well tolerated with a benign post-treatment course.
Patients and Methods: This study was multi-institutional and designed as a blinded, randomized, and shamcontrolled trial. A series of <n>200</n> patients with an AUA Symptom Index (AUASI) of .12, a peak flow rate of
,12 mL/sec, and cystoscopic evidence of BPH were randomized 2:1 (active to sham) and treated in seven physician offices under a Food and Drug Administration-supervised and audited premarket approval protocol. No
intravenous sedation was used in any patient. Follow-up for the sham-treatment group was 3 months, at which
time, patients could cross over to an active treatment. A total of 119 patients have completed 1-year follow-up.
Results: The active and sham groups were statistically identical at baseline. The 1-hour total treatment was
extremely well tolerated using urethral lidocaine and oral medications; not a single prostate block or parental
dose of medication was required. The active-treatment group demonstrated a statistically significant reduction ( p , 0.05) in AUASI at 3 months compared with sham treatment, with an AUASI decrease from 22.4 to
12.4 (n 5 124) for active v 22.9 to 17 for sham (n 5 62). For the 119 patients in the active arm who have
reached 12 months, the AUASI has fallen to 10.6 points (47.1% decrease), and the peak flow rate has increased 5.0 mL/sec (58.1%). Postprocedure catheterization was typically 2 or 3 days, and the 16.8% of patients who failed their first voiding trial all voided within 1 week. No major adverse events such as stricture,
rectal findings, or ejaculatory changes have been reported.
Conclusions: This study demonstrates that the TherMatrx TMx-2000 TUMT effectively treats symptomatic
BPH in the physician office with minimal morbidity.
INTRODUCTION

been introduced over the last decade. Symptoms of BPH, such
as increased urinary frequency, incontinence, nocturia, urgency,
and a slow or interrupted urinary stream, afflict millions of men
throughout the world with an overall prevalence of histologic
BPH at autopsy of 50% by age 60 and 90% by age 85.1 In a

T

HE TRADITIONAL SURGICAL MANAGEMENT of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) has evolved as pharmacologic management and minimally invasive therapies have

1Departments

of Urology and Radiology, Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, Illinois.
University Medical Center, St. Louis, Missouri.
3Urologic Surgery Associates, Overland Park, Kansas.
4Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, Virginia.
5Scottsbluff Urology Associates, Scottsbluff, Nebraska.
6Methodist Urology, Indianapolis, Indiana.
7Urology Associates of DuPage, Wheaton, Illinois.
Presented at the 18th World Congress on Endourology and SWL and 16th Basic Research Symposium, São Paulo, Brazil, September 14–17,
2000.
2Washington

57

58

ALBALA ET AL.

large survey of men age 60 and older, it was noted that the
prevalence of two or more voiding symptoms was 35%, and
approximately 25% of men have a decreased flow rate at age
55 and 50% at age 70.2,3 Serious complications of BPH such
as urinary retention, renal failure, obstructive uropathy, and
urosepsis occur in a small but significant number of patients
(,10%) and represent the classic indications for transurethral
resection of the prostate (TURP).4 Surgery, although effective,
includes a 1% to 3% mortality rate. Significant morbidities of
TURP or open prostatectomy include dribbling and urge incontinence (20%–50%), stress incontinence (1%), impotence
(5%–40%), retrograde ejaculation (50%–75%), urethral stricture (5%–15%), chronic urinary tract infection (5%), and hemorrhage (5%–10%). These side effects are of significant concern for patients.
The selection of therapy for a particular patient usually takes
into account the severity of the clinical situation, the patient’s
overall medical condition, and his tolerance for potential side
effects. Fortunately, the majority of men seek therapy for bothersome voiding symptoms before there are indications for
TURP, and therefore, pharmacologic and minimally invasive
therapies are appropriate initial measures for most patients. Because the widely available Urologix Targis and Prostatron and
Vidamed TUNA procedures are too painful for most office settings and have potential periprocedure and long-term side effects, most patients and urologists begin with pharmacologic
therapy consisting of <tx>alpha-blockade</tx> and <tx>5-alpha-reductase inhibition</tx>, either alone or in <tx>combination</tx>. However, within 1 year
of initiation, at least a third of men have discontinued medical
therapy because of lack of efficacy or bothersome side effects.
Furthermore, many men remain on medical therapy because it
is effective and choose to live with sexual side effects as well
as lethargy or hypotension. For those patients who drop off therapy or choose to tolerate side effects, the need for alternative
therapies for <tx>BPH</tx> is considerable. If a minimally invasive therapy is to provide a real alternative to medical therapy, treatment
tolerance must be excellent, and the risk of an irreversible side
effect or adverse event must be comparable; i.e., extremely low.
<tx>Transurethral microwave thermotherapy (TUMT)</tx> uses microwave energy to heat the prostatic tissue to temperatures
.45ºC, thereby inducing coagulation necrosis. The TUMT devices already approved by the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) use a microwave catheter that is cooled on its surface.
Sufficient microwave energy levels are required to penetrate
deep to the urothelial surface and maintain thermotherapy tissue temperatures despite the constant conductive cooling caused
TABLE 1.

BASELINE CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS
(MEAN 6 SD)a
Active

No.
Age (years)
AUASI
PFR (mL/sec)
PVR (mL)
TRUS volume (cc)
PSA (ng/mL)
aAll

125
65.2 6 7.3
22.2 6 5.0
8.9 6 3.0
57.9 6 53.9
50.5 6 18.6
2.6 6 1.8

Sham
65
64.6 6
22.7 6
8.4 6
52.6 6
47.1 6
2.6 6

7.1
5.7
2.0
51.9
17.9
2.3

differences were insignificant by two-sample t-test.

FIG. 1. Change in AUASI score at 3 months for active- and
sham-treatment groups. Forty-five percent reduction in AUASI
in the treatment arm was statistically significant compared to
sham.

by the catheter. Because the delivered microwave energy is often 60 to 90 W, temperature safety alarms are incorporated into
the device to protect the rectal mucosa and urethra. Although
symptomatic relief is provided for the majority of patients, the
safety systems are not sufficient in all patients, and the occurrence of rectal fistula and penile necrosis in patients treated by
the Targis and Prostatron devices prompted a FDA health notification (www.fda.gov/CDRH/safety/bph.html) to alert urologists to the risks.
The <tx>TherMatrx TMx-2000</tx> is a TUMT system that creates a
directly measured temperature of 50ºC in the transition zone
and, because of refinements in equipment and catheter design,
does not require cooling to achieve tolerance and avoid posttreatment slough. Because energy-withdrawing effect of the circulating coolant does not need to be overcome and the treated
tissue is closer to the catheter, lower wattages can be applied
to achieve necrosis in the transition zone. Although this is the
tissue traditionally resected during <tx>TURP</tx>, it has not previously
been a target for TUMT because of concerns about patient tolerance during the treatment and the potential risk of deleterious postprocedure urethral sloughing. Phase II TherMatrx TMx2000 dose–response studies demonstrated that there is a
microwave thermotherapy dose that provides excellent patient
tolerance, minimal side effects, and a beneficial outcome. In
this paper, we report our experience using the TherMatrx TMx2000 device (TherMatrx, Inc. Bannockburn, IL) in a large randomized, sham-controlled study in patients with BPH.

PATIENTS AND METHODS
Male patients between 50 and 80 years old with a diagnosis of
symptomatic BPH to a sufficient degree that treatment was warranted were included in this study. A total of 200 patients were
randomized into either a <tx>sham</tx> or a <tx>microwave treatment</tx> group.
All patients underwent a thorough history and physical examination as well as prostatic specific antigen (PSA) assay. Patients
with a PSA above the normal level of 4 ng/mL but less than 10
ng/mL were entered in the study only after transrectal biopsy of
the prostate demonstrated no evidence of cancer. All patients were
blinded as to their group assignment, and outcome analysis was
performed by individuals blinded to the randomization.
Inclusion criteria included an American Urological Association Symptom Index (AUASI) .13 and a bother score .11.

OFFICE-BASED TUMT

59

FIG. 2. Change in AUASI over time in active-treatment
group. Reduction in all indices is statistically significant at 12
months compared with baseline. Six patients have dropped out
to date.

Peak flow rates (PFRs) were ,12 mL/sec, and the postvoiding
residual volume (PVR) was ,125 mL. Transrectal ultrasonography (TRUS) was done on all patients prior to the procedure,
and prostate volumes were required to be between 30 and
100 cc without a significant intravesical middle lobe. All patients underwent <tx>cystoscopy</tx>. Patients were randomized 2:1 either to a treatment group or a sham group after meeting all the
inclusion criteria. Sham-treated patients underwent placement
of the microwave catheter for the treatment period without energy delivery and received the same post-treatment care as the
active-treatment patients. All patients were unblinded after the
3-month follow-up visit, and the sham-treated patients were
given the opportunity to receive active treatment. Patient follow-up was done at 1, 3, 6, 9, and 12 months. The pretreatment
clinical data were similar in the two groups (Table 1).
The TUMT utilized for this study was with a RX-200 prostate
applicator for heating and monitoring. The RX-200 applicator
is a modified Foley catheter containing a coiled microwave-radiating antenna. There are two thermosensor tracks on the surface of the catheter that are in contact with the prostatic tissue
for temperature monitoring and mapping along its length.
All treatments were performed in urology offices or clinics.
In order to address patient comfort and the typical anxiety surrounding such a treatment, Toradol (10 mg), a narcotic analgesic (at some sites), and lorazepam (Ativan, 2.0 mg) were
given orally 45 minutes before treatment. Prior to catheter insertion, <tx>lidocaine jelly</tx> was injected into the urethra and allowed
to remain in place for 15 minutes. The RX-200 applicator was
then passed, the balloon inflated, and the drainage lumen connected to a collection bag. Gentle traction was applied so the
inflated balloon remained seated in the trigone. The area of heating was confined to the coiled antenna zone, which was located
between the bladder neck and the distal end of the transition
zone.5,6 The applicator is available with antennae of different
lengths. The length from the bladder neck to the verumontanum

TABLE 2.
AUASI Change
210.6

was measured by TRUS, and the appropriate applicator was selected depending on this length.
The treatment temperature was controlled by a computer to
provide a gradual increase. The computer automatically initiated a preestablished rate of temperature increase; however, the
physician or the patient could intervene to ensure optimum tolerance. All treatments of the prostate were delivered to a peak
tissue temperature of 50º to 55ºC. After the temperature had
been increased to approximately 50ºC, the treatment was continued for 40 minutes under computer control. Although the
rectum is well outside the periurethral target zone, the rectal
temperature was monitored in all patients as a safety precaution. If the rectal temperature were to exceed 42.5ºC at any time
during the treatment, an audible alarm would sound, and power
delivery, controlled by the computer, would immediately stop.
After the treatment was completed, the microwave applicator was removed and a Foley catheter inserted into the bladder.
The Foley catheter was left in place from 2 to 4 days. Patients
were evaluated by AUASI, bother scores, as well as objective
parameters such as urine flow rates, PUR, PSA, and TRUS. The
clinical data were evaluated at 1, 3, 6, 9, and 12 months after
treatment. The primary outcome indicator for the study was the
statistical comparison between the active- and sham-treatment
groups after 3 months.

RESULTS
Figure 1 summarizes the change in AUASI at 3 months for
the active- and sham-treatment groups. The 45% reduction in
AUASI in the active arm at 3 months is statistically significant
compared with the change in the sham arm. Figure 2 shows that
the improvement in AUASI, bother, and quality of life was
maintained over 12 months for the treated patients. The AUASI,
which was 12.4 at 3 months, was 11.9 at 12 months. The bother
index initially was 18.0 and 12 months at 9.1. The quality of
life index was initially found to be 11.4, and this decreased to
5.8. The reduction in all indices was statistically significant at
12 months compared with baseline. The treatment arm contains
only those patients originally randomized to receive an active
treatment, and not any patients who crossed over from the sham
arm. The 12-month AUASI and PFR changes, summarized in
Table 2, demonstrate a striking decrease in AUASI and a 58.1%
increase in PFR.
The treatment course itself was extremely well tolerated by
the patients, and the post-treatment course for the study patients
is summarized in Table 3. Recatheterization was the most common event, seen in 16.8% of patients. The protocol did not permit the use of <tx>alpha-blockers</tx> or other medications to improve
bladder emptying, and all patients voided successfully by 1
week. Except for transient urinary retention, this study suggests
that long-term side effects will be rare.

TWELVE -MONTH POST-TREATMENT EFFICACY DATA
(% change)

PFR change

(% change)

(247.1)

15.0 mL/sec

(58.1)

60

ALBALA ET AL.
TABLE 3.

SUMMARY OF POST-TREATMENT COURSE
(7% OF PATIENTS )
Active treatment
(N 5 121)

Recatheterization
Dysuria
Urgency
Gross hematuria
Bladder spasm
Urethral stricture
Ejaculatory dysfunction
pain
Rectal damage fistula

Sham treatment
(N 5 62)

16.8
6.6
0
9.1
4.1
0
0

0
4.8
0
0
0
0
0

0 0

DISCUSSION
In the past several years, there has been increased interest in
the use of minimally invasive therapies for BPH. This interest
has been driven by the recognition by the urologist that most
patients do not require immediate surgery as well as by the desire of patients to avoid surgery. Medical therapy is often effective, but there remains the common scenario when medical
therapy does not provide satisfactory symptomatic improvement or is complicated by an undesirable side effect. In addition, chronic pharmacologic therapy is often expensive or perceived to be undesirable by patients.
The use of microwave energy to reach thermotherapy temperatures of 45ºC and to improve the symptoms of BPH was
developed in the late 1980s and early 1990s by Devonec and
his colleagues.7 This early experience resulted in the development of the Prostatron, and in 1993, Blute et al8 reported the
results of the treatment of 150 BPH patients with transurethral
thermotherapy in a multi-institutional study.8 This TUMT procedure and device utilized a delivery catheter that incorporated
TABLE 4.

urethral cooling because it was believed that optimal patient
tolerance would be facilitated. The net effect of this urethral
cooling was an increase in the microwave power needed to heat
the gland and to expand the area of tissue necrosis deeper into
the prostate and potentially close to the rectum and ejaculatory
ducts. The FDA Public Health Notification reports thermal injuries using the high-energy cooled Urologix Targis and Prostatron TUMT devices. The injuries identified include penile
necrosis and rectal fistula formation. The warning letter notes
that high power combined with oversedation when associated
with catheter migration or failure of rectal temperature monitoring can lead to serious complications. Table 4 summarizes
the FDA-identified problems and the way TherMatrx addresses
these issues. The lower wattage of TherMatrx TUMT allows
tolerance without sedation, and this feature addresses many of
the FDA’s concerns.
The randomized study presented here found that despite the
absence of urethral cooling, treatment tolerance at urethral temperatures of 50ºC was excellent. This observation, that the prostatic urothelium is not in itself prohibitively sensitive to a temperature of 50ºC, suggests that the addition of cooling to
microwave catheters was not mandated by the urethral surface
temperature itself but may have been required because of the
energy levels being used, the antenna or catheter design, or other
unknown reasons associated with the device or treatment. From
the outcome of this TUMT study, it appears that the creation
of a necrotic zone in the central prostatic tissue is not required
in order to obtain clinical improvement for the patient.9 Coagulation necrosis in the transition zone adjacent to the catheter
causes clinical benefit.
The TherMatrx TUMT approach also has other important
implications. Because there is no cooling, the actual prostatic
temperature is measured in real time during the entirety of each
patient treatment. Therefore, a precise dose of heat is delivered
on the basis of the highest measured tissue temperature as the
thermosensors are scanned along the entire prostate. This fea-

FDA-IDENTIFIED PROBLEMS ASSOCIATED WITH HIGH -POWER TUMT
AND SOLUTIONS WITH THER MATRX TMX -2000 DEVICE

FDA-identified problem
Sensor placement/migration
with resultant heating
outside prostate
Oversedation of patient,
which compromises his
ability to communicate pain

Foley or rectal balloon
leakage resulting in loss
of correct anatomic position

Solution
Patient-held control
button to reduce power
immediately in response
to any pain
Tolerance determines sedation
levels. The TherMatrx
TMx-2000 TUMT
at 7 WV 60–90 W for
high-power TUMT is
intrinsically safer because no
parenteral sedation is used and less
power is directed toward sphincter,
rectum, and ejaculatory ducts
Microwave antenna migration would
be evident with the TMx-2000, as
the alert patient feels the pain of
distal urethral heating. The rectal
sensor of the TMx-2000 does not
utilize a balloon for localization

OFFICE-BASED TUMT
ture allows every patient to receive the same optimized dose.
If urethral cooling is applied and the thermosensor is on the
catheter surface, then the temperature readings are a blend of
those of the circulating cold water and the tissue. Furthermore,
because of the target zone is immediately adjacent to the treatment catheter, less wattage is required to obtain thermotherapy
temperatures. The ability to treat with less wattage reduces the
chance of an untoward adverse event in the case of catheter migration, balloon failure, or antenna malfunction.
The effect of transition zone necrosis is to change BPH symptoms and voiding dynamics. Many noninvasive treatments for
BPH have documented improvement of patient symptomatology
and even mild improvement in flow rate, but studies comparing
preprocedure and postprocedure complete urodynamic evaluations have not impressively demonstrated reduction in the degree
of mechanical obstruction.10 Furthermore, the FDA-supervised
approval studies for the Targis and Prostatron as well as the TherMatrx did not demonstrate a statistically significant reduction in
TRUS-measured prostate volume. The obvious question, then,
becomes why do these therapies improve symptoms without definitive evidence of relief of obstruction? The answer is likely related to the innervation of the bladder neck and prostate smooth
muscle. It is well accepted that alpha-blockers reduce AUA
Symptom Scores and improve lower urinary tract symptoms but
have minimal effect on objective urodynamic obstruction or
cause no real tissue loss. A possible explanation of the success
of TUMT is that the induced tissue necrosis disrupts periurethral
alpha-adrenergic tone.10 This would explain the relative improvement in symptoms without corresponding improvement in
objective obstructive parameters.

CONCLUSION
The similarity between high-energy TUMT and TherMatrx
TUMT is that both therapies use microwave energy to create
temperatures in excess of 50ºC, resulting in necrosis and permanent tissue change. However, the absence of urethral surface
cooling during TherMatrx TUMT creates a therapy that is different in four interdependent ways: (1) reproducible dose delivery to the target zone; (2) greater patient tolerance; (3) more
benign post-treatment course; and (4) fewer side effects. Using
the TherMatrx TMx-2000 device, our study of TUMT showed
a 1-year statistically significant reduction in AUA Symptom
Score of 47.1% and an increase in PFR of 58.1% in a randomized, blinded, sham-controlled trial. The TherMatrx procedure was extremely well tolerated in the office setting, and in

61
no case was intravenous sedation used. The postoperative treatment course was characterized by minimal subacute, self-resolving side effects. These characteristics of the TherMatrx
TMx-2000 TUMT make it an ideal therapeutic option before,
as an adjunct to, or after pharmacologic BPH therapy.

REFERENCES
1. Berry SJ, Coffey DS, Walsh PC, et al. The development of human
benign prostatic hyperplasia with age. J Urol 1984;132:474–479.
2. Arrighi HM, Guess HA, Metter EJ, et al. Symptoms and signs of
prostatism as risk factors for prostatectomy. Prostate 1990;16:253–
261.
3. Guess HA, Arrighi HM, Metter EJ, et al. Cumulative prevalence
of prostatism matches the autopsy prevalence of benign prostatic
hyperplasia. Prostate 1990;17:241–246.
4. Medina JJ, Parra RO, Moore RG. Benign prostatic hyperplasia (the
aging prostate). Med Clin North Am 1999;83:1213–1229.
5. Yerushalmi A, Fishelovitz Y, Singer D, et al. Localized deep microwave hyperthermia in the treatment of poor operative risk
patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia. J Urol 1985;133:873–
876.
6. Yerushalmi A, Servadio C, Leib Z, et al. Local hyperthermia for
treatment of carcinoma of the prostate: A preliminary report.
Prostate 1982;3:623–630.
7. Stawarz B, Szmigielski S, Ogrodnik J, et al. A comparison of
transurethral and transrectal microwave hyperthermia in poor surgical risk benign prostatic hyperplasia patients [see comments].
J Urol 1991;146:353–357.
8. Blute ML, Tomera KM, Hellerstein DK, et al. Transurethral microwave thermotherapy for management of benign prostatic hyperplasia: Results of the United States Prostatron Cooperative
Study. J Urol 1993;150:1591–1596.
9. Devonec M, Tomera K, Perrin P. Review: Transurethral microwave
thermotherapy in benign prostatic hyperplasia. J Endourol 1993;7:
255–259.
10. Larson TR, Bostwick DG, Corica A. Temperature-correlated histopathologic changes following microwave thermoablation of obstructive tissue in patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia. Urology 1996;47:463–469.

Address reprint requests to:
David M. Albala, M.D.
Duke University Medical Center
Rm. 1112, Green Zone
DUMC 3457
Durham, NC 27710
E-mail: albaloo2@mc.duke.edu

This article has been cited by:
1. Richard M Hoffman, Manoj Monga, Sean P Elliott, Roderick MacDonald, Jens Langsjoen, James
Tacklind, Timothy J Wilt, Richard M HoffmanMicrowave thermotherapy for benign prostatic hyperplasia .
[CrossRef]
2. Bob Djavan, Amir Kazzazi, Yakup Bostanci. 2011. Revival of thermotherapy for benign prostatic hyperplasia.
Current Opinion in Urology 1. [CrossRef]
3. T. R. W. Herrmann, A. J. Gross, D. Schultheiss, P. M. Kaufmann, U. Jonas, M. Burchardt. 2006.
Transurethral microwave thermotherapy for the treatment of BPH: still a challenger?. World Journal of
Urology 24:4, 389-396. [CrossRef]
4. Benjamin Larson, Christian Huidobro, Cristian Acevedo, David Busel, Lance Mynderses, Joseph Collins,
Thayne Larson. 2005. In Vivo Temperature Mapping of Prostate during Treatment with TherMatrx
TMx-2000 Device: Heat Field and MRI Determinations of Necrotic Lesions. Journal of Endourology 19:8,
1021-1025. [Abstract] [Full Text PDF] [Full Text PDF with Links]
5. K WALMSLEY, S KAPLAN. 2004. TRANSURETHRAL MICROWAVE THERMOTHERAPY FOR
BENIGN PROSTATE HYPERPLASIA: SEPARATING TRUTH FROM MARKETING HYPE. The
Journal of Urology 172:4, 1249-1255. [CrossRef]
6. Ricardo R. Gonzalez, Alexis E. Te. 2003. How do transurethral needle ablation of the prostate and
transurethral microwave thermotherapy compare with transurethral prostatectomy?. Current Prostate
Reports 1:2, 73-82. [CrossRef]
7. Stavros Gravas, Maria Pilar Laguna, Jean J.M.C.H. de la Rosette. 2003. Efficacy and Safety of Intraprostatic
Temperature-Controlled Microwave Thermotherapy in Patients with Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia:
Results of a Prospective, Open-Label, Single-Center Study with 1-Year Follow-Up. Journal of Endourology
17:6, 425-430. [Abstract] [Full Text PDF] [Full Text PDF with Links]
8. 2003. AUA Guideline on Management of Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia (2003). Chapter 1: Diagnosis and
Treatment Recommendations. The Journal of Urology 170:2, 530-547. [CrossRef]
9. Ricardo R. Gonzalez, Alexis E. Te. 2003. How do transurethral needle ablation of the prostate and
transurethral microwave thermotherapy compare with transurethral prostatectomy?. Current Urology
Reports 4:4, 297-306. [CrossRef]
10. Stavros Gravas, Pilar Laguna, Jean de la Rosette. 2003. Thermotherapy and thermoablation for benign
prostatic hyperplasia. Current Opinion in Urology 13:1, 45-49. [CrossRef]
