Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 45:8 (2004), pp 1420–1430

doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7610.2004.00338.x

A new social communication intervention for
children with autism: pilot randomised
controlled treatment study suggesting
effectiveness
Catherine Aldred,1 Jonathan Green,2 and Catherine Adams1
1

Human Communication and Deafness Group, University of Manchester, UK; 2Academic Department of Child
Psychiatry, Booth Hall Children’s Hospital, Manchester, UK

Background: Psychosocial treatments are the mainstay of management of autism in the UK but there is
a notable lack of a systematic evidence base for their effectiveness. Randomised controlled trial (RCT)
studies in this area have been rare but are essential because of the developmental heterogeneity of the
disorder. We aimed to test a new theoretically based social communication intervention targeting parental communication in a randomised design against routine care alone. Methods: The intervention
was given in addition to existing care and involved regular monthly therapist contact for 6 months with a
further 6 months of 2-monthly consolidation sessions. It aimed to educate parents and train them in
adapted communication tailored to their child’s individual competencies. <n>Twenty-eight</n> children with
autism were randomised between this treatment and routine care alone, stratiﬁed for age and baseline
severity. Outcome was measured at 12 months from commencement of intervention, using standardised instruments. Results: All cases studied met full Autism Diagnostic Interview (ADI) criteria for
classical autism. Treatment and controls had similar routine care during the study period and there
were no study dropouts after treatment had started. The active treatment group showed signiﬁcant
improvement compared with controls on the primary outcome measure – Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) total score, particularly in reciprocal social interaction – and on secondary
measures of expressive language, communicative initiation and parent–child interaction. Suggestive
but non-signiﬁcant results were found in Vineland Adaptive Behaviour Scales (Communication Subdomain) and ADOS stereotyped and restricted behaviour domain. Conclusions: A Randomised
Treatment Trial design of this kind in classical autism is feasible and acceptable to patients. This
pilot study suggests signiﬁcant additional treatment beneﬁts following a targeted (but relatively
non-intensive) dyadic social communication treatment, when compared with routine care. The
study needs replication on larger and independent samples. It should encourage further RCT designs
in this area. Keywords: Autism, intervention, treatment, social communication, RCT.
Abbreviations: ADOS: Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule; ADI: Autism Diagnostic Interview;
RCT: randomised controlled trial.

Autism is a severe developmental disability in which
core impairments in language and reciprocal social
communication have a profound inﬂuence on children’s social development into adulthood (Howlin,
1997). Contemporary research has shown it to be a
highly heritable neurodevelopmental disorder
(Bailey, Phillips, & Rutter, 1996). However, the longterm outcome of the disorder is inﬂuenced by the
context of social care (Szatmari, Bartolucci, Bremner,
Bond, & Rich, 1989; Venter, Lord, & Schopler, 1992)
and, in the UK, psychosocial rather than biological
treatments are the mainstay. But despite the burden
of the disorder and the acknowledged need for
psychosocial treatments, there have been very few
systematic studies of them (Charman et al., 2003a).
Existing psychosocial treatment studies (mainly
non-randomised) have shown that autism-speciﬁc
behaviours can be improved with specialised interventions promoting a structured, consistent environment which scaffolds social interaction (Howlin &
Rutter, 1987; Lovaas, 1993; Ozonoff & Cathcart,

1998; Jocelyn, Casiro, Beattie, Baw, & Kneisz, 1998;
Shapiro, Frosch, & Arnold, 1987; Warren, 1993).
Some parent group programmes (Sussman, 1999;
Shields, 2001) have also focused on enhancing carer
awareness and teaching communication strategies,
although no systematic evaluations have been published. Despite this work, recent narrative reviews
have highlighted the deﬁciencies of current evidence
in the area: the lack of adequate sample sizes and
blind ratings (Smith, 1999); and the lack of randomised designs with adequate power (Delprato,
2001). The recent Cochrane review of parent-mediated treatments for autism (Diggle, McConachie, &
Randle, 2003) found only two small RCTs meeting
systematic criteria. Wolery and Garﬁnkle (2002) argue that randomised control trials of treatments that
address mediating processes as well as outcome
variables are needed.
The substantial research over the past decade on
the core social communication deﬁcits in autism,
such as joint attention (Mundy, Sigman, Ungerer, &

Ó Association for Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 2004.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA

Randomised social communication treatment for autism

Sherman, 1986), pragmatic communication skills
(Prizant & Wetherby, 1987) and the ability to read
social meanings (Tager-Flusberg, 1993; Sigman &
Kasari, 1995), has raised the possibility of developing tailored treatments targeting such deﬁcits. These
deﬁcits are persistent, highly predictive of future
outcome in social and educational skills and
strongly associated with severity of behavioural
symptoms (Howlin, 1997). Recent narrative reviews
(Rogers, 1996; Gresham, Beebe-Frankenberger, &
MacMillan, 1999) have commented on how little research has been done on such interventions. This
paper describes a treatment approach that takes
such basic research along with treatment models
from the speech and language literature relating to
normal and language-impaired as well as autistic
children; and applies these to the challenge of
developing and evaluating a targeted systematic
treatment in the ﬁeld.
The lack of joint attention skill in autism is
associated with language delay and deviation in the
condition (Loveland, Landry, Hughes, Hall, &
McEvoy, 1988; Mundy et al., 1986). In normal
development, joint attention provides a scaffolding
for emerging communication (Baker & Nelson, 1984)
and is a key precursor of ‘referential’ understanding
(what is being said) and ‘intersubjectivity’ (understanding the communicative intent of others)
(Tomasello, 1995). Referential understanding is in
turn a key factor in vocabulary growth and pragmatic competence in normal (Butterworth & Grover,
1990) and autistic development (Wetherby & Prizant,
1992). The pragmatic difﬁculties in autism are
characterised by the use of rote language, less
frequent and less overt child communicative initiations and a limited range of communicative acts
(Prizant & Wetherby, 1987; Eales, 1993); these
difﬁculties persist into later development (Adams,
Green, Gilchrist, & Cox, 2002).
The consequence of such communication impairments in autism can result in the parent and child
failing to establish a communicative ‘meshing’ and
verbal interaction of a kind that is known to facilitate
language development (Reddy, Hay, Murry, & Trevarthen, 1997). The child’s communicative signals
are often weak or infrequent or poorly timed (Reddy
et al., 1997), drawing parents into a didactic controlling style of discourse which uses adult-orientated initiations and strategies to take over from the
child’s ‘topic’ and control and redirect the child’s
focus of attention (Sigman, Mundy, Sherman, &
Ungerer, 1986; Nassan El-Ghoroury & Romanczyk,
1999). Observed rates of parental initiations and
non-reciprocal communications increase (Koegel,
Bimbela, & Schreiman, 1996). On the other hand, if
parents can become more sensitive and responsive
to the autistic child’s (even subtle) communicative
initiations, the child’s initiations and language
development can increase (Jocelyn et al., 1998).
Research on interventions with language-impaired

1421

children suggests that an adult communication style
that complements the child’s utterance with a small
addition within the child’s existing language repertoire (‘semantic contingency’) leads to more rapid
vocabulary development (Conti-Ramsden, 1990).
The rationale for the treatment studied here is
therefore that children with autism require a high
level of adapted parental communication which is
speciﬁcally focused at the ﬁne detail of interaction in
the context of their speciﬁc impairments. The intervention ﬁrstly concentrates on promoting highly
sensitive adult responses, where actions made by the
child are interpreted by the adult as having meaning
and related to assumed intentions and desires
(Watson, 1998). Once greater joint attention and
reciprocity are achieved, further development of
child communication is facilitated by the use of action routines and repeated scripts and the introduction of elaborations, pauses, and teasing to
promote participation, anticipation and intentional
actions from the child (Wetherby & Prizant, 1992;
Yoder & Warren, 2001).
We wished to evaluate the feasibility of mounting a
randomised controlled study of this treatment, since
this is the gold standard approach to treatment
evaluation and timely in the current development of
this research area (Harrington, Cartwright-Hatton, &
Stein, 2002). Given the stage of the current evidence
base, we focused this pilot study on testing whether
adding this new treatment would confer additional
beneﬁts over the routine clinical care available to
both groups; an approach that has been advocated
and proved effective in investigating other treatment
areas (e.g., Byford et al., 1999). We wished to study
additionally whether modiﬁcation of the putative
mediating variables targeted by the intervention (an
increase in observed positive synchronous interaction and communication repair between parent and
child) would be associated with a decline in the child
autistic behaviours. The primary hypothesis was
that the target psychosocial treatment would improve clinic-observed autistic impairments in children compared with treatment as usual. Subsidiary
hypotheses were that there would be an increase in
duration of positive interaction observed between
parent and child and that improvement in child social functioning generalised into everyday settings.

Methods
Target treatment
The target treatment is a social communication intervention for children with autism and pervasive developmental disorder developed by the ﬁrst author and
colleagues and described more fully in Aldred, Pollard,
Phillips, and Adams (2001). It aims to increase the
quality of parental adaptation and communication with
children with autism. Controlling and intrusive
responses are progressively replaced with responses

1422

Catherine Aldred, Jonathan Green, and Catherine Adams

aimed at facilitating the child’s active communication
exchanges and signalling pragmatic intentions. It can
work in a complementary fashion with other behavioural
approaches to autistic symptoms. The intervention
requires communication therapy skills and familiarity
with developmental psycholinguistics, and communication intervention strategies. It is manualised and the
treatment is staged to reﬂect the developmental
progression of early pre-linguistic skills. The initial focus
is on shared attention, followed by parental sensitivity
and responsiveness, adapted communication strategies
and consolidation and elaboration (see Appendix 1).
After an initial series of parental psycho-educational
workshops, parents and child attend monthly treatment sessions for six months, followed by a further six
months of less frequent maintenance sessions. In the
sessions, videotape of parent child play is reviewed with
the therapist and changes planned to the parent interaction and communication responses. These are
recorded in a written programme. Parents are asked to
spend 30 minutes daily alone with their child at home
to practise these strategies. The aim is that changes
initiated during this time will generalise into natural
daily routines. The pace of the work is adapted to a
family’s progress.

Routine care
Families in the target group received the study intervention in addition to ongoing routine care. The control
group received routine care alone. An audit of all children in both arms of the study showed no signiﬁcant
differences in ongoing educational and therapy provision (see results below).

Assessment measures
Assessment measures tapped different domains of
outcome (autistic behaviours, interaction between parent and child, social communication), and used multiple approaches to data collection (researcher ratings;
parent questionnaires; parent interviews, video coding).
The most widely accepted standardised measures
currently available were selected.
The Autism Diagnostic Interview (ADI) (Lord, Rutter, &
Le Couteur, 1994) is an investigator-based parent interview focusing on behaviours reported currently and
between 4 and 5 years of age. For children under 4
years the coding uses current symptoms only. The ADI
was administered at initial ascertainment as part of the
diagnostic screening, using the standard diagnostic
algorithm threshold score for autism of 21 for nonverbal children and 22 for verbal children, which has
been found to be valid in diagnosing autism in preschool children (Lord, Storoschuk, Rutter, & Pickles,
1993).
The Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS)
(Lord et al., 2000) consists of a play-based standardised
protocol, which presents the child with a series of
structured and semi-structured presses for observing
interaction, communication, repetitive behaviours and
play. The ADOS has a standardised diagnostic algorithm score on communication and reciprocal social
interactions domains and this total algorithm score was
used at screening to contribute to diagnosis and to

measure change in autistic symptoms during treatment. Modules one and two were used as appropriate
for developmental ability and to avoid measurement
confounds the children were assessed on the same
module at pre-and post-assessment. Although the
ADOS was not initially designed as an outcome measure, it is a sensitive standardised measure of current
functioning and its use to measure change has been
discussed with its main developer, Catherine Lord
(personal communication); it has been applied in another treatment study to measure outcome (Owley
et al., 2001). Two qualiﬁed trainers trained by Catherine Lord at the University of Chicago trained the
assessors in administrating the ADOS and coding to
85% reliability.
The Vineland Adaptive Behaviour Scales (Sparrow,
Balla, & Cicchetti, 1984) is a measure of adaptive
functioning widely used in autism research and indexed
the generalisation of change outside the clinical environment. Parents/carers are interviewed about their
child’s everyday functioning across a range of domains
(communication, daily living skills, and socialisation).
Vineland scores provide a measure of functional skills
across a wide range of ages and levels of impairment
and are a prognostic indicator (Freeman, Del’Homme,
Guthrie, & Zang, 1999).
The MacArthur Communicative Developmental Inventory (Fenson et al., 1993) was used to record the
understanding and expression of words and gestures.
The instrument was chosen to accommodate a wide
range of language skills and child cooperation. Parents
completed the checklist with the assessment team.
The Parenting Stress Index (Abidin, 1995) is a parentrated record generating scores for total stress with subscores for parent distress, dysfunctional parent–child
interaction and child difﬁculty.
Parent–child interaction. A video coding procedure
was developed by the research team based on a 30minute free play session with standardised toys. The
parent was asked to play with and talk to their child
using the toys, as they would do normally at home.
Standardised event sampling was carried out recording
the frequency of the following variables (see Appendix 2
for an example of coding):
• Communication acts: verbal and non-verbal behaviours that have communicative intent or form part of
a communication act.
• Asynchronous parental communication: responses
aimed at redirecting, controlling or making demands
on the child to respond.
• Synchronous parental communication: comments,
statements, acknowledgments or social interaction,
which maintained the child’s responses.
• Semantic contingency: verbal responses related in
meaning to the child’s previous verbal or non-verbal
topic.
• Shared attention: episodes in which the parent and
child shared attentional focus.
All codes were analysed using HARCLAG software
(Reeves, 1994).
A pilot study of the video analysis was undertaken to
establish the inter-rater reliability and sensitivity of this
video coding method. Independent samples of autism
(n ¼ 5), speciﬁc language impairment (n ¼ 5) and

Randomised social communication treatment for autism

normal development (n ¼ 5) were matched for
developmental age. Two independent raters blind to
diagnosis achieved inter-rater reliability of 80% or more
across all variables and the coding showed good sensitivity for differences in parent–child communication
between the three groups.
Inter-rater reliability of video coding for main study.
Two raters blind to treatment status independently
reviewed 25% of the videos during the main study to
conﬁrm continuing inter-rater reliability. Inter-rater
agreement for child and adult communication acts
was 100% (Cohen’s kappa 1.0); for mothers’ synchrony/asynchrony, 95.6% (kappa 1.00); for shared
attention, 80.4 % (kappa .78); for semantic contingency, 95.6 % (kappa .92). Persisting coding disagreements were resolved by conference between
coders.

1423

of baseline autistic behaviours, since these variables
might have predicted response to treatment. Four
subgroups were thus generated within both treatment
(n ¼ 14) and control (n ¼ 14) conditions: ‘Young High
Functioning’, aged 24–47 months, total ADOS score 11–
17; ‘Young Low Functioning’, aged 24–47 months, total
ADOS score 18–24; ‘Older High Functioning’, aged 48–
71 months, ADOS score 11–17; ‘Older Low Functioning’,
aged 48–71 months, ADOS score 18–24.
During the randomisation process and before treatment commenced, three of the initially randomised
children moved out of the area and one further child
randomised to the control group was found to be closely
related to another in the treatment group. These four
children were therefore dropped from the study at this
stage and replaced by equivalent stratiﬁed cases to give
balanced stratiﬁed numbers across treatment and
control groups. Thereafter, the analysis was on a strict
intention-to-treat basis.

Sample
Twenty-eight children with autism were recruited
from the northwest of England over a period of 18
months. Cases were unselected consecutive clinician
or self-referrals who met the inclusion criteria for the
study. These were: age of 2;0–5;11 years at ascertainment; clinical diagnosis of autistic disorder by the
assessing professional; fulﬁlling full diagnostic criteria for classical autism on the ADI. (All but 4 cases
also showed full diagnostic algorithm criteria on the
ADOS and these 4 cases were just 1 point below cutoff, see Table 1.) Exclusion criteria were: severe global
developmental delay; severe environmental deprivation in infancy; 1st language other than English;
diagnosed hearing impairment; diagnosed visual
impairment; known chronic psychiatric or physical
illness in parents; no evidence of any desire to
interact with adult.
An initial screen assessment checked that all subjects recruited fulﬁlled the criteria for the project. Full
research assessments were then conducted at baseline
and at the end of the 12-month follow-up period.
The assessment team consisted of an educational
psychologist and educational audiologist who were
experienced in assessing children with autism and were
blind to the subjects’ group status.
A demographic questionnaire gained information on
family socio-economic factors. The sample was predominantly middle-class but contained a wide range of
educational and income levels. Median years in education was 17.6 years (range 16–21) for fathers and
16.5 years (range 16–21) for mothers. Two mothers
were African-Caribbean; all other parents were Caucasian. The study achieved 83% attendance at the treatment sessions and there were no dropouts from active
treatment once it had started. Consequently, parental
motivation was considered high amongst the families
participating in the project.

Randomisation
Randomisation into treatment and control groups was
undertaken by an independent statistician after completion of baseline assessment. The randomisation was
stratiﬁed throughout for chronological age and severity

Protection against bias
The researchers were blind to case-control status.
Parents were told not to disclose their treatment status
during assessment. In order that the treated children’s
experience of the treatment room did not inﬂuence the
assessments or betray itself to the researchers, all follow-up assessments were conducted in a different room
to the intervention. Parents travelled to the centre
for assessment using a different route and entrance.
Repeat ADOS assessments were alternated between
the researchers to avoid sequential interviewing of the
same child.

Statistical design
We analysed the change between pre- and post-treatment ratings for each group. Symptom severity and
degree of impairment at baseline were considered
potentially important predictors of change and partialled out during all analyses using analysis of covariance. Secondary analysis included an analysis of
change in standardised measures and video analysis
across the four stratiﬁed subgroups, allowing for additional analysis relative to prognostic variables of age
and severity of autism.

Results
Subject characteristics
The active treatment group (n ¼ 14) consisted of 13
boys and 1 girl. At baseline, median chronological
age was 48 months (range 29–60), ADI algorithm
score 44 (24–56) and ADOS algorithm score 16.5
(11–21). The control group (n ¼ 14) consisted of 12
boys and 2 girls. Median baseline chronological age
was 51 months (24–71), ADI score 38 (22–66) and
ADOS algorithm score 16.5 (11–22). Maximum
possible ADI score is 80 and maximum ADOS score
is 24. Composition of the stratiﬁed subgroups is
shown in Table 1.

1424

Catherine Aldred, Jonathan Green, and Catherine Adams

Table 1 Baseline characteristics of subgroups

Group
Treatment group
Whole
1T
2T
3T
4T
Control group
Whole
1C
2C
3C
4C

Median
age (range)

Median baseline
ADI score (range)

Median baseline ADOS
total score (range)

N

Sex

14
4
3
4
3

13 M, 1F
4M
3M
4M
3 M, 1 F

48
37.5
44
61
60

(29–60)
(29–45)
(38–44)
(51–70)
(53–60)

44
45
40
53
38

(24–56)
(24–56)
(30–48)
(50–56)
(34–38)

16.5
12.5
20
16
21

(11–21)
(11–16)
(18–20)
(11–17)
(19–21)

14
4
3
4
3

12 M, 2 F
4M
2 M, 1 F
3M
3 M, 1 F

51
42
33
64
67

(24–71)
(32–47)
(24–40)
(54–71)
(54–71)

38
34
36
38
52

(22–66)
(22–62)
(28–39)
(22–66)
(28–54)

16.5
13
19
16
20

(11–22)
(11–15)
(19–21)
(11–16)
(18–22)

T: Treatment Subjects; C: Control Subjects; 1: Young High Functioning (2–3.11 years, ADOS score11–17); 2: Young, Low
Functioning (2–3.11 years, ADOS score 18–24); 3: Older High Functioning (4–5;11 years, ADOS score 11–17); 4: Older Low
Functioning (4–5;11 years, ADOS score 18–24).

Routine care experienced by all cases was audited
using a standard questionnaire for parents followed
by detailed telephone interview. No signiﬁcant differences in routine care received between treatment
and control groups were found. Both treatment and
control groups received comparable routine speech
and language therapy provision over the duration of
the project. Two treatment and one control child received no speech and language therapy input.
Speech and language therapy was usually provided
in school (11 treatment, 12 control). Four children
received one-to-one therapy (1 treatment, 3 control),
but most received indirect therapy via termly
programmes of advice given to the class teacher and
assistant.
Regarding other autism-speciﬁc interventions, two
children (one treatment and one control) received
Applied Behavioural Analysis (Lovaas, 1993). Six
children in the treatment group and eight children in
the control group received TEACCH (Treatment and
Education of Autistic and Communication Handicapped Children; Schopler & Olley, 1982). Nine
treatment and eight control children received some
form of social skills training. Six children in each
group were receiving medical intervention, and seven
children were on special gluten-free diets.

Table 2 Baseline and post-treatment ADOS scores
Mean baseline ADOS
total score (SD)

Group

Treatment group
Whole
16.1
1T
12
2T
19
3T
14
4T
20
Control group
Whole
15.6
1C
11
2C
19
3C
14
4C
20

Mean follow-up ADOS
total score (SD)

(SD 4.5)
(3.3)
(1.3)
(3.3)
(1.0)

11.8
6
13
11
17

(SD 6.4)
(3.6)
(5.6)
(4.5)
(2.6)

(SD 4.9)
(2.3)
(1.0)
(3.3)
(1.3)

16.1
13
16
16
20

(SD 4.4)
(4.0)
(4.3)
(1.3)
(.6)

ADOS Total
25

20
ADOS Total Score

Routine care received in both groups

15
Pre
Post
10

5

Change during treatment
ADOS scores. The active treatment group as a whole
showed a signiﬁcantly greater effect than controls
on ADOS scores (Table 2, Figure 1). Co-varying
for baseline ADOS score, there was a signiﬁcant
difference in ADOS change between the groups
(F 1,25 ¼ 7.30; p ¼ .01). All participants in the
target treatment group, with the exception of two
who remained at baseline levels, showed increases in
reciprocal social interaction, social engagement, social rapport, social responses and spontaneous

0
1T

2T

3T

4T

1C

Treatment

2C

3C

4C

Control
Subjects

Figure 1 ADOS total scores by subgroup at baseline
and 12-month follow-up

initiation of social interaction. The reduction in
autism symptoms in the treatment group was seen
across the severity ratings and age groups (Figure 1)

Randomised social communication treatment for autism

Language – MacArthur Inventory. The treatment
group made very signiﬁcant relative progress in
expressive language skills measured on the MacArthur Inventory during the year of the study
compared with controls (Figure 2, Table 3). In the
treatment group, progress in expressive vocabulary
occurred across the subgroup severity ratings and
age bands (Figure 2). In the controls, four subjects

Vocabulary Production
450
400
350
Vocabulary

with a trend for the active treatment effect to be
greater in the younger age subgroup. In the control
condition, only the young low-functioning subgroup
showed any improvement in autistic symptoms
during the study; the other groups showed either no
change or increase in symptom scores.
Analysis of the ADOS sub-domains showed the
signiﬁcant treatment effect mainly to be shown in
the Reciprocal social interaction sub-domain. Mean
pre-assessment domain score here was 10.1 (sd
2.7) for the treatment group and 9.8 (sd 3.3) for the
control group. Mean post-assessment score was 7.7
(sd 3.8) for the treatment group and 10.7 (sd 3.2)
for the control group. Co-varying for the baseline
ADOS score, this represented a signiﬁcant difference between the groups (F 1,25 ¼ 10.30; p ¼
.004). By contrast, no signiﬁcant treatment effect
was found in the Communication sub-domain (even
though parents independently reported increased
communication in the children). This may, however,
be an artefact of the ADOS module 1 coding in this
domain (see discussion below). Qualitatively at
post-treatment assessment, children in the treatment group were noted to use a range of single
words socially to seek attention, request and direct
attention. This contrasted with control participants
who were more likely to use words for labelling
objects, with less intentionality or communicative
effect.
There were non-signiﬁcant differential changes in
stereotyped and restricted behaviours during the
study. Mean pre-assessment ADOS stereotyped and
restricted behaviour domain score was 1.9 (range 0–
6) for the treatment group, 1.8 (range 0–6) for the
control group and mean post-assessment score was
1.3 (range 0–6) for the treatment group and 2.2
(range 0–6) for the control group. This represented a
reduction in mean score of .6 for the treatment group
compared with an increase of .4 in the controls.
However, co-varying for baseline ADOS score, this
represented a non-signiﬁcant effect (F 1,25 ¼ 3.25,
p ¼ .084).

1425

300
250

Pre
Post

200
150
100
50
0
T1

T2 T3

T4

C1 C2 C3 C4

Treatment

Control
Subjects

Figure 2 Parent-rated expressive vocabulary scores
(MacArthur Communication Inventory) by subgroup at
baseline and 12-month follow-up

remained non-verbal, three subjects had a reduction
in expressive language scores and there was expressive vocabulary growth only in the young high-functioning subgroup. Both groups showed evidence of
increase in comprehension, but no signiﬁcant difference between treatment and controls (Table 3).

Vineland Adaptive Behaviour Scales. Higher
scores on the Vineland reﬂect greater abilities. Mean
pre-assessment Vineland Communication Subdomain score was 22.6 (sd 13.3) for the treatment
group, 20.0 (sd 10.8) for the control group. Mean
post-assessment score was 36.9 (sd 21.2) for the
treatment group and 28.7 (sd 16.6) for the control
group, representing a mean change of 14.3 for the
treatment group and 8.7 for the controls. However,
co-varying for the baseline score, this represented a
non-signiﬁcant effect (F 1,25 ¼ 2.58; p ¼ .121).
Parent–child interaction. The active treatment
group showed signiﬁcantly better outcome in parental positive synchronous communication and increase in child communication acts (Table 4). Over
treatment there was a mean increase in synchrony of
7.3% in the treatment group and a mean decrease of
7.6% in controls. Parents in the treatment group
demonstrated an increase in comments and statements; parents in the control group an increase
in demands and intrusive language. There was no

Table 3 MacArthur Communication Development Inventory: Words and Gestures
Variable
Language comprehension
Expressive language

Group
Treatment
Control
Treatment
Control

Mean baseline raw score (SD)
71.7
95.4
28.0
25.6

(2,383)
(426)
(467)
(683)

Mean follow-up raw score (SD)
222.7
146.8
199.4
33.1

(40,431)
(11,426)
(25,606)
(683)

F

p-value

2.93

.1

18.5

<.001

1426

Catherine Aldred, Jonathan Green, and Catherine Adams

Table 4 Frequency of parent–child interaction codes at baseline and follow-up
Variable
Parent synchrony
Parent asynchrony
Child communication acts
Parent communication acts
Child shared attention
Parent shared attention

Group
Treatment
Control
Treatment
Control
Treatment
Control
Treatment
Control
Treatment
Control
Treatment
Control

Baseline mean frequency (SD)
57.8
57.1
39.7
42.9
30.8
30.1
66.3
70.7
72.0
62.8
93.5
81.3

(15.0)
(49.5)
(16.1)
(16.1)
(10.2)
(11.1)
(11.8)
(11.0)
(23.6)
(24.5)
(5.3)
(22.3)

signiﬁcant difference between groups, however, in
observed levels of shared attention.

Parenting Stress Index. Covarying for baseline
scores, there was no signiﬁcant difference between
the groups in change in total PSI score (F .29;
p ¼ .597) or on sub-scores of parental perception of
their own level of distress, interaction difﬁculties
with the child, or perception of a difﬁcult child on
scores for both mother and father.

Discussion
This study of the effect of a new treatment for autism
compared with routine clinical care is one of few to
our knowledge that have attempted a rigorous approach to randomised design and steps to minimise
ascertainment and rating bias. There is a current
lack of treatment evidence base in autism but many
clinical claims for the effectiveness of intensive and
expensive treatments of what is a chronic impairing
disorder. Consequently we took the view in designing
the study that the ﬁrst pragmatic question for clinical
research at this time should be whether a new
intervention conferred any additional beneﬁt over the
routine clinical care currently available to families.
Successful answers to this question could then lead
to later studies comparing speciﬁc, similarly evaluated, treatments. We undertook therefore a pilot
effectiveness trial within the current clinical context,
which included additionally the testing of hypothesised mediating treatment variables. We studied
children satisfying full ADI criteria for autistic disorder; these were not, in other words, ‘mild’ or
‘atypical spectrum’ cases. We have shown that such a
design is achievable and acceptable to patients.
Families engaged well with the randomisation design
as well as the target treatment and there were no
dropouts from either arm of the study once treatment
had started. We used a broad range of methods to
measure outcome and mediating variables in laboratory and everyday settings, including researcher
and parent ratings. Our groups proved to be well

Follow-up mean frequency (SD)
65.1
49.5
32.6
50.5
37.6
27.6
64.4
72.4
77.6
62.6
88.6
80.3

(14.3)
(18.9)
(14.3)
(18.8)
(10.1)
(16.5)
(13.0)
(16.5)
(17.8)
(32.7)
(8.7)
(30.1)

F

p-value

6.86

.016

7.91

.009

4.65

.041

1.15

.293

1.70

.204

1.94

.176

matched in terms of routine care received during the
trial period. The stratiﬁcation of participants during
randomisation according to severity of autism and
age, and an analysis controlling for baseline severity
of autism, enabled comparison of outcome between
and within groups according to factors that may be
thought to inﬂuence prognosis and response to
treatment. It also importantly acted to minimise the
effect of case heterogeneity that often confounds
treatment studies in this area. However, this was a
pilot study with relatively small sample sizes and
(given the chronicity of the disorder) a relatively short
follow-up time. The results, therefore, especially
those relating to the subgroup analyses, clearly need
to be treated with appropriate caution.
The overall result supports the primary hypothesis. The target intervention resulted in asigniﬁcant decrease in overall researcher-rated autistic
symptoms compared to controls, including amongst
children with severe baseline impairment. These
gains were seen in reciprocal social interaction; an
apparent differential improvement also in stereotyped and restricted behaviours did not reach
signiﬁcance. Additionally, parent-rated expressive
vocabulary showed signiﬁcant relative increase in the
treatment group. Despite this increase in reported
language use, there was no observed treatment effect
over controls on ADOS communication sub-domain
scores. This paradox is likely to be an artefact of the
way ADOS module 1 is coded in respect of language
abnormality. Children who move within this module
from having no language to having some language
become liable then to code positively on measures of
language deviancy which previously were nonapplicable – and this is reﬂected in the total abnormality score on this domain. Thus a developmental
improvement (movement from no language to some
language) can result in a paradoxical increase in
domain abnormality score. The suggestion of relative
improvement on the Vineland communication domain data in the treatment group did not reach signiﬁcance with this sample size, so that we cannot say
whether these differential treatment effects successfully generalise into everyday functioning.

Randomised social communication treatment for autism

Our subsidiary hypotheses addressed the presumed mediating variable speciﬁcally targeted by the
treatment: the communicative interaction between
parent and child in a laboratory setting. Here, the
treatment group showed an increase in the overall
quantity of parental synchronous communication
and a decrease in asynchronous interactions. By
contrast, parental asynchrony increased in the same
period in the control group, suggesting a deterioration of communication with age with routine clinic
treatment. An apparent relative increase in observed
shared attention in the treatment group did not
reach signiﬁcance. However, the amount of shared
attention with the examiner recorded in the reciprocal social domain of the ADOS examination did
differentially improve in the treatment group. Thus
although joint attention was an important theoretical focus behind the intervention, we found it was
not the most sensitive marker of change in child
communication – better was the precise way that
parents adapted their communication to match their
child’s competencies.
Frequency and quality of observed child communication acts increased in the treatment group while
decreasing in controls. This improvement is convergent with the parental report of differential increase
in the expressive language production in the treatment group in everyday settings. This ﬁnding was
especially true of children who were young and low
functioning at baseline assessment. Improvements
in expressive communication following treatment
can therefore be linked here with the development of
social gestures, pointing, showing, giving, and the
awareness of other persons being intentional agents,
as measured on the ADOS reciprocal-social domain.
We need to consider a number of limitations of the
design and potential confounding factors which
might explain the positive ﬁndings. Firstly, the design does not enable us to test whether the gains
were the result of extra non-speciﬁc therapist
attention or contact time. We consider this unlikely,
however. The treatment involved an additional three
to four hours’ therapist contact time each month and
we consider that the speciﬁc targeted changes demonstrated in parent–child communication would be
unlikely to be effected solely through a non-speciﬁc
attention effect of this degree. The internal validity of
the treatment effect is further supported by the
consistency of ﬁndings across different assessment
and analytical techniques. A future study design
could, however, include a therapist contact control
condition with the addition of an extra study group.
Secondly, the observed effects could be attributed
to the results of a non-speciﬁc reduction in parental
anxiety following increased attention and support.
This is not suggested by the Parenting Stress Index
ﬁndings, which remained unchanged during
treatment. This lack of change also suggests that
mood-related parental reporting bias is not a likely
explanatory factor in the parent-rated results.

1427

Parental report of improvements in expressive and
receptive language skills might have been biased by
the heightened awareness and increased observation
of language skills in their children, which was
encouraged as part of the target treatment. However,
triangulation with similar ﬁndings on researcherrated ADOS and video analysis argue against the
ﬁndings being simply the result of rating bias.

Conclusions
Provision of structured and individually tailored
programmes is likely to be a critical aspect of successful treatment in autism (Howlin, 1998). The
methods of assessment used here, including analysis of parent–child interaction, may provide one such
route to individualising treatments (Charman et al.,
2003a). This study suggests that a speciﬁc intervention that addresses bi-directional adult–child
communication breakdown, joint attention and is
tailored to the speciﬁc needs of cases can improve
autistic symptoms across severity and age groups in
terms of quality of reciprocal social communication
and expressive language, consistent with the ﬁndings of Charman et al. (2003b). It also suggests that
such individualised dyadic treatments targeting social communication need not be too expensive. The
current intervention only required monthly contact
with therapists (although we think that an additional
school liaison component may be usefully added in
the future to improve generalisation). In future
studies of the approach we plan a cost-effectiveness
element in the design.
Gains in social engagement, reciprocity, communication and language skills were seen amongst both
pre-verbal and verbally able children. Repairing the
communicative interaction seems to enable parents
to establish a positive cycle of more effective communication and reciprocal enjoyment. While autism
is a life-long condition, with no evidence as yet that
the persistent core impairments can be fundamentally altered with intervention (Howlin, 1998), it remains possible that interventions improving early
social communication competencies may promote
developmental skills (Jordan, 2001) and help minimise the secondary behaviour/emotional problems
known to be prevalent later in the disorder (Green,
Gilchrist, Burton, & Cox, 2000). Clearly these current ﬁndings require replication within larger cohorts and with designs that build on these results.
Future designs could include a longer follow-up
period, the provision of contact controls or testing
this treatment approach directly against other
intensive behavioural or parental group interventions. If replicated, this study suggests, however,
that a developmentally orientated, focused, dyadic
approach to social communication treatment can be
a useful addition to regular care in managing autistic
disorders.

1428

Catherine Aldred, Jonathan Green, and Catherine Adams

Acknowledgements
The project was funded by a grant from the Shirley
foundation. We acknowledge the collaboration of staff
at the Rycroft Centre, Royal Schools for the Deaf,
Cheadle for their collaboration in the therapy and
assessment work in the study and the families for
their engagement and hard work in the treatment.

Correspondence to
Jonathan Green, Academic Department of Child
Psychiatry, Booth Hall Children’s Hospital, Blackley,
Manchester M9 7AA, UK; Tel: +161 220 5024/5;
Fax: +161 220 5227; Email: jonathan.green@
man.ac.uk

References
Abidin, R.R. (1995). Parental Stress Index (3rd edn).
Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Adams, C., Green J., Gilchrist, A., & Cox, A. (2002).
Conversational behaviour of children with Asperger’s
Syndrome and Conduct Disorder. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 43, 679–690.
Aldred, C.R., Pollard, C., Phillips, R., & Adams, C.
(2001). Multi-disciplinary social communication intervention for children with autism and Pervasive
Developmental Disorders: The Child’s Talk research
project. Journal of Educational and Child Psychology,
18, 76–87.
Bailey, A., Phillips, W., & Rutter, M. (1996). Autism:
Towards an integration of clinical, genetic, neuropsychological, and neurobiological perspectives. Journal
of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 37, 89–126.
Baker, N., & Nelson, K.E. (1984). Recasting and related
conversational techniques for triggering syntactic
advances in young children. First Language, 5, 3–22.
Butterworth, G.E., & Grover, L. (1990). Joint visual
attention, manual pointing and preverbal communication in human infancy. In M. Jeannerod (Ed.),
Attention and performance X111 (pp. 605–624).
Hillside, NJ: Erlbaum.
Byford, S., Harrington, R.C., Torgerson, D., Kerfoot, M.,
Dyer, E., Harrington, V., Woodham, A., Gill, J., &
McNiven, F. (1999). Cost-effectiveness analysis of a
home-based social work intervention for children and
adolescents who have deliberately poisoned themselves: The results of a randomised controlled trial.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 174, 56–62.
Charman, T., Baron-Cohen, S., Swettenham, J., Baird,
G., Drew, A., & Cox, A. (2003b). Predicting language
outcomes in infants with autism and pervasive
developmental disorder. International Journal of
Language and Communication, 38, 265–285.
Charman, T., Howlin, P., Aldred, C., Baird, G., Degli
Espinosa, F., Diggle, T., Kovshoff, H., Law, J., Le
Couteur, A., MacNiven, J., Magiati, I., Martin, N.,
McConachie, H., Peacock, S., Pickles, A., Randle, V.,
Slonims, V., & Wolke, D. (2003a). Research into early
intervention for children with autism and related
disorders: Methodological and design issues. Autism:

The International Journal of Research and Practice, 7,
217–225.
Conti-Ramsden, G. (1990). Maternal recasts and other
contingent replies to language impaired children.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 55, 262–
274.
Delprato, D.J. (2001). Comparisons of discrete-trial and
normalized behavioural language intervention for
young children with autism. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 31, 315–325.
Diggle, T., McConachie, H.R., & Randle, V.R.L. (2003).
Parent mediated early intervention for young children
with autistic spectrum disorder (Cochrane review). The
Cochrane Library, Issue 4. Chichester, UK: John
Wiley & Sons.
Eales, M.J. (1993). Pragmatic impairments in adults
with childhood diagnoses of autism or developmental
receptive language disorder. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 23, 593–617.
Fenson, L., Dale, P.S., Reznick, S., Thal, D., Bates, E.,
Hartung, J.P., Pethick, S., & Reilly, J.S. (1993). The
MacArthur Communication Development Inventories.
San Diego: Singular.
Freeman, B.J., Del’Homme, D., Guthrie, D., & Zang, F.
(1999). Vineland Adapted Behaviour Scales as a
function of age and initial IQ in 210 autistic children.
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 29,
379–384.
Green, J.M., Gilchrist, A., Burton, D., & Cox, A. (2000).
Social and psychiatric functioning in adolescents
with Asperger Syndrome compared with Conduct
Disorder. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 30, 279–293.
Gresham, F.M., Beebe-Frankenberger, M.E., & MacMillan, D.L. (1999). A selective review of treatments for
children with autism: Description and methodological
considerations. School Psychological Review, 28,
559–575.
Harrington, R.C., Cartwright-Hatton, S., & Stein, A.
(2002). Annotation: Randomised trials. Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 43, 695–704.
Howlin, P. (1997). Prognosis in autism: Do specialist
treatments affect long-term outcome? European Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 6, 55–72.
Howlin, P. (1998). Practitioner review: Psychological
and educational treatments for autism. Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 39, 307–322.
Howlin, P., & Rutter, M. (1987). Treatment of autistic
children. Chichester: Wiley.
Jocelyn, L.J., Casiro, O.G., Beattie, D., Baw, J., &
Kneisz, J. (1998). Treatment of children with autism:
A randomised controlled trial to evaluate caregiverbased intervention programme in community
day-care centres. Journal of Developmental and
Behavioural Paediatrics, 19, 326–334.
Jordan, R. (2001). Multidisciplinary work for children
with autism. Educational and Child Psychology, 18,
5–14.
Koegel, R.L., Bimbela, A., & Schreiman, L. (1996).
Co-lateral effects of parent training on family interactions. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders, 26, 347–359.
Lord, C., Risi, S., Lambrecht, L., Cook, E.H., Leventhal,
B.L., DiLavore, P.C., Pickles, A., & Rutter, M. (2000).
The autism diagnostic observation schedule–generic:

Randomised social communication treatment for autism

A standard measure of social and communication
deﬁcits associated with the spectrum of autism.
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 30,
205–223.
Lord, C., Rutter, M., & Le Couteur, A. (1994). Autistic
Diagnostic Interview–Revised: A revised version of a
diagnostic interview for caregivers of individuals with
possible pervasive developmental disorder. Journal of
Autism and Developmental Disorders, 24, 659–685.
Lord, C., Storoschuk, S., Rutter, M., & Pickles, A. (1993).
Using the ADI-R to diagnose autism in pre-school
children. Infant Mental Health Journal, 14, 234–252.
Lovaas, O.I. (1993). The development of a treatmentresearch project for developmentally disabled and
autistic children. Journal of Applied Behavioural
Analysis, 26, 617–630.
Loveland, K., Landry, S., Hughes, S.O., Hall, S.K., &
McEvoy, R.E. (1988). Speech acts and pragmatic
deﬁcits of autism. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Research, 31, 593–604.
Mundy, P., Sigman, M., Ungerer, J., & Sherman, T.
(1986). Deﬁning the social deﬁcits of autism: The
contribution of non-verbal communication measures.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 27, 657–
669.
Nassan El-Ghoroury, N., & Romanczyk, G. (1999). Play
interactions of family members towards children with
autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders, 29, 249–258.
Owley, T., McMahn, W., Cook, E.H., Lauthere, T.,
South, M., Mays, L.Z., Shernoff, E., Lainhart, J.,
Modahl, C.B., Corsello, C., Ozonoff, S., Risi, S., Lord,
C., Leventhal, B.L., & Filipek, P.A. (2001). Multisite,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of porcine
secretin in autism. Journal of the American Academy
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 40, 1293–1299.
Ozonoff, S., & Cathcart, K. (1998). Effectiveness of a
home programme intervention for young children
with autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders, 28, 25–32.
Prizant, B., & Wetherby, A. (1987). Communicative
intent: A framework for understanding social-communicative behaviour in autism. Journal of American
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 26,
472–479.
Reddy, V., Hay, D., Murry, L., & Trevarthen, C. (1997).
Communication in infancy: Mutual regulation of affect
and attention. In G. Bremner, A. Slater, & G. Butterworth (Eds.), Infant development: Recent advances (pp.
247–274). Hove, UK: Psychological Press.
Reeves, D. (1994). HARCLAG: A programme for the
sequential analysis of observational data. Manchester, UK: Hester Adrian Research Centre, University of
Manchester.
Rogers, S. (1996). Brief report: Early intervention in
autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 26, 243–246.
Schopler, E., & Olley, J.G. (1982). Comprehensive
educational services for autistic children. The
TEACCH model. In C.R. Reynolds & T.R. Gutkin
(Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (pp. 629–643),
New York: Wiley.
Shapiro, T., Frosch, E., & Arnold, S. (1987). Communicative interaction between mothers and their autistic
children: Application of a new instrument and

1429

changes after treatment. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 26, 485–490.
Shields, J. (2001). The NAS EarlyBird programme:
Partnerships with parents in early intervention. Autism, 5, 49–56.
Sigman, M., & Kasari, C. (1995). Joint attention across
contexts in normal and autistic children. In C. Moore
& P. Dunham (Eds.), Joint attention: Its origins and
role in development (pp. 189–203). Hillside, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Sigman, M., Mundy, P., Sherman, T., & Ungerer, J.A.
(1986). Social interactions of autistic, mentally retarded, and normal children and their caregivers. Journal
of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 27, 647–656.
Smith, T. (1999). Outcome of early intervention for
children with autism. Clinical Psychology: Science
and Practice, 6, 33–49.
Sparrow, S., Balla, D., & Cicchetti, D. (1984). Vineland
Adaptive Behavior Scales. Minnesota: American
Guidance Service.
Sussman, F. (1999). More than words: Helping parents
promote communication and social skills in children
with autism spectrum disorder. Toronto: Hanen
Centre.
Szatmari, P., Bartolucci, G., Bremner, R., Bond, S., &
Rich, S. (1989). A follow up study of high-functioning
autistic children. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 19, 213–225.
Tager-Flusberg, H. (1993). What language reveals about
the understanding of minds in children with autism.
In S. Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-Flusberg & D. Cohen
(Eds.), Understanding others’ minds: Perspectives
from autism (pp. 138–157). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Tomasello, M. (1995). Joint attention as social cognition.
In C. Moore & P.J. Dunham (Eds.), Joint attention: Its
origins and role in development (pp. 103–130). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Venter, A., Lord, C., & Schopler, E. (1992). A follow up
study of high-functioning autistic children. Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 33, 489–507.
Warren, S. (1993). Early communication and language
intervention: Challenges for the 1990’s and beyond.
In A. Kaiser & D. Gray (Eds.), Enhancing children’s
communication: Research foundations for intervention
(pp. 375–395). Baltimore: Paul Brookes.
Watson, L.R. (1998). Following the child’s lead: Mothers’
interactions with children with autism. Journal of
Autism and Developmental Disorders, 28, 51–59.
Wetherby, A.M., & Prizant, B.M. (1992). Facilitating
language and communication development in autism:
Assessment and intervention guidelines. In D. Berkell
(Ed.), Autism: Identiﬁcation, education and treatment
(pp.107–134). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wolery, M., & Garﬁnkle, A.N. (2002). Measures in
intervention research with young children who have
autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders, 32, 463–478. Review.
Yoder, P.J., & Warren, S.F. (2001). Intentional communication elicits language-facilitating maternal
responses in dyads with children who have
developmental disabilities. American Journal on
Mental Retardation, 106, 327–335.
Manuscript accepted 18 December 2003

1430

Catherine Aldred, Jonathan Green, and Catherine Adams

Appendix 1: Description of the social communication intervention
Psycho-education: promotes adult understanding of the early communication stages that precede the
development of language and meaningful communication.
Anticipated child outcome: Greater opportunity for interactive engagement with reduced distractions.
Focusing: establishes coordinated attention between parent and child.
Anticipated child outcome: The child achieves a shared engagement with the adult. Episodes of shared
attention are promoted and sustained, providing social openings for adult support and reciprocal interaction.
Imitating the timing and precise form of the activities allows the parent to enter the child’s experiences and
infer the intended meanings and child goals.
Sensitivity: decreases intrusive demands made on the child and replaces these with comments aimed at
facilitating and sustaining the child’s responses. The adult avoids using questions, redirecting attention or
demands and instead provides an ongoing verbal commentary about the child’s actions and object focus.
Anticipated child outcome: The child becomes more participative and begins to process meaning by
experiencing interactions matched to his/her own attentional focus.
Modelling: Models language input that matches the child’s processing capacities, attentional focus and
topic. The adult carefully chooses the words spoken to the child to accurately match the child’s attention focus,
action and intended meaning. The adult translates the child’s non-verbal communication signals into simple
words.
Anticipated child outcome: The child makes sense of the action events and spoken language promoting
verbal understanding and production.
Consolidation: establishes predictable routines and repetition in rehearsed interactive play.
Anticipated child outcome: Repetition equips the child with a predictable framework to extend understanding, interaction, social anticipation and participation. The adult to use consistent, predictable and
rehearsed language scripts, which are repetitive and familiar to consolidate understanding.
Elaboration: Adds variation and expansions to the child’s play and language to expand on the child’s
language repertoire and promote intentionality, initiation and communication acts by using teasing, pauses
and openings for the child to ﬁll with a social and verbal response.
Anticipated child outcome: The child becomes aware of both the adult’s role and his/her own control over the
play routine, moving from passive responses to active participation and initiation in games involving role
reversal which form an important step in the awareness of intentionality.
Further details of the intervention can be obtained from Dr Catherine Aldred or Dr Jonathan Green at the
University of Manchester.

Appendix 2: Details of video coding
Code
A
B

C
M

7

8
0

Deﬁnition of parent codes
Synchronous Communication Acts

Description

Verbal or non-verbal, non-directive communication acts, comments, statements or
acknowledgement, which maintain the ﬂow and follow the child’s focus of attention.
Asynchronous Communication Acts Verbal or non-verbal acts, used for the sole purpose of directing or to control the
behaviour of another; commands; acts which direct or seek attention; questions
or negation, which interrupt the ﬂow and focus of attention.
Semantically Contingent (SC)
Utterances that relate to the previous semantic topic used by the other person.
Shared Attention (SA)
Sharing a topic or focus with the other person through action, feelings, emotions,
experiences, games or objects. Involving a reference to the person and the object
by looking, showing, giving or body orientation.
Communication Acts (CA)
Verbal or non-verbal acts used with intent or to inﬂuence the responses of the other
person, including requesting, seeking attention, directing, acknowledging,
questions, demands, comments or statements.
Semantically Contingent (SC)
Utterances that relate to the previous semantic topic used by the other person.
Shared Attention (SA)
Mutually sharing the object, action, feeling or experience with the other person.
Involving referencing the person and the objects by showing, looking, giving
or body orientation.