Acta Pædiatrica ISSN 0803–5253

REGULAR ARTICLES

A new method for the treatment of recurrent abdominal pain of prolonged
negative stress origin
G Alfven (gosta.alfven@karolinska.se), A Lindstrom
´
Paediatric Department, Huddinge Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

Keywords
Children, Psychosomatic, Recurrent abdominal
pain, Stress, Tender point, Treatment
Correspondence
G. Alfven, Paediatric Department, Huddinge
´
Hospital, Child Health Care,
Hallunda, Box 104, S-145 01 Norsborg, Sweden
Tel: +46 (0) 857837665 | Fax: +46 (0)
853175814 | Email: gosta.alfven@karolinska.se
Received
13 June 2006; revised 13 June 2006; accepted 16
June 2006
DOI:10.1111/j.1651-2227.2006.00028.x
No conﬂict of interest and funding exists.

Abstract
Objective: To test the hypothesis that psychological treatment given in combination with somatic
treatment can relieve recurrent abdominal pain (RAP) of psychosomatic origin in childhood.
Study design: Stomach Pain Clinic Group A, comprising 25 children receiving a combination of
psychological treatment and physiotherapy given by two different persons and Stomach Pain Clinic
Group B, comprising 23 children receiving physiotherapy only, were constituted in a randomized
manner. Stomach Pain Clinic Group C, including 35 children receiving an integrated combination of
psychological treatment and somatic treatment given by the same person was also constituted, as
well as a reference group. Treatment outcome was measured by calculating a pain score and tender
points (TP) score at inclusion and after 1 year.
Results: The pain score after 1 year improved signiﬁcantly in all four groups. Stomach Pain Clinic
Groups A and B did not show any signiﬁcant difference, but Stomach Pain Clinic C had a signiﬁcantly
better outcome than Stomach Pain Clinic Group B. Stomach Pain Clinic Groups A and C had a
signiﬁcant decrease in the TP score after 1 year. Pain scores and TP scores calculated for all Stomach
Pain Clinic groups correlated signiﬁcantly at follow-up after 1 year.
Conclusion: For children with psychosomatic RAP, a special method for integrated psychological and somatic
treatment is probably effective. The results have to be conﬁrmed in a randomized controlled study. These children
have a special pattern of TPs related to their disorder, which diminishes with improvement in the disorder.

Treatment of a disorder should be based on a knowledge of
its cause(s) and its pathophysiological mechanisms. During
the last few decades, our understanding of recurrent abdominal pain (RAP) of non-organic origin has increased. Criteria
for diagnosing functional RAP according to the abdominal
symptoms have been elaborated (1). There is a growing realization that stress is of importance in the aetiology of many
cases (2,3), and that stress can be of importance in allodynia
and hyperalgesia of the intestine (4). The stressor, as well as
the susceptibility to stress, differs markedly (5).
Cognitive therapy has been shown to be helpful for
non-organic RAP according to several studies (6). For
psychosomatic RAP,1 theoretically, solving the psychological problem(s) causing the stress should cure the disorder,
but this has not been demonstrated (8). It could be due to
ineffective methods and/or heterogeneous samples studied,
including cases of nonpsychosomatic RAP.
The diagnosis of psychosomatic RAP should be based on
a clear medical understanding of the bodily consequences
of stress and according to clear diagnostic criteria. An im1 The term psychosomatic symptom will be used for the stressinduced symptoms discussed in this article, thereby underlining the
psychological dimension of stress and modern neurobiological insights into the close relationship between psyche and body mediated by the basolateral nucleus of amygdale (7). Equivalent terms
are conversion and somatoform symptom.

76

C

portant diagnostic dilemma for psychosomatic disorders, in
our experience, is the avoidance of overdiagnosing. Many
disorders, such as lactose intolerance, cow milk allergy, gastroenteritis and even H.p. gastritis, can increase intestinal
wall sensitivity causing allodynia, and thus pain upon stress
may arise more easily (9). When organic causes of intestinal allodynia have been ruled out, which may be rather difficult, the pain reaction to prolonged negative stress may
be more straightforward. As a consequence, only a small
group of RAP of non-organic origin will be diagnosed as
true functional disorders and the diagnostic subgrouping will
look different (9) than when strictly applying the Rome II
criteria (10).
Based on years of scientific studies of RAP and clinical
experience, the main author has developed a hypothetical
model of how prolonged negative stress alters the homeostasis of the body, making it more prone to recurrent pain
(see also Fig. 1). According to this hypothesis, prolonged
stress can influence the muscular system, hormonal regulation, intestinal sensitivity and motility, and the pain system (11), leading to muscular involvement, altered hormonal regulation, disturbed intestinal function and recurrent
pain. Additional support for the hormonal (12) and muscular involvement (13) in psychosomatic RAP has accumulated during the last few years. Criteria for a specific diagnosis of psychosomatic RAP have been developed and tested
(9).

2006 The Author(s)/Journal Compilation

C

2006 Foundation Acta Pædiatrica/Acta Pædiatrica 2007 96, pp. 76–81

Alfven and Lindstrom
´

Treatment of RAP

Design
This is a randomized controlled study of the outcome of
combined psychological treatment and physiotherapy compared to physiotherapy only and a controlled study of the
outcome of integrated psychological and bodily treatment
compared to the two above-mentioned groups. A reference
group receiving no special treatment was also constituted.
The change in pain score and TPs has been used as a means
for measuring treatment outcome.

Hypothesis: Treatment of the psychological causes and the
bodily consequences thereof can relieve the recurrent psychosomatic pain.

The children studied
The Stomach Pain Clinic is a special ward for diagnosing and
treating children with RAP of both organic and non-organic
origin. A modified version of the Children’s Comprehensive
Pain Questionnaire (CCPQ) (15) was filled in for each child.
Children meeting Apley’s criteria for RAP2 (16) (for details,
see online Appendix S1), and the criteria for a psychosomatic
diagnosis (9; Appendix S1), recruited consecutively, were included in the study. The children were primarily, secondarily
and tertiarily referred from the southwestern suburban area
of Stockholm. In the year 2000, this catchment area had an
employment rate of 70.2% and social welfare payments were
received by 7.8%.
The children recruited during 1996–1999 were randomized either to psychological treatment in combination with
physiotherapy, Stomach Pain Clinic Group A (n = 25), or
to physiotherapy only, Stomach Pain Clinic Group B (n =
23) (for details, see Table S1). These children belong to a
group of 100 children with RAP described in detail in an
earlier study (9). The psychological treatment was in traditional form focusing on understanding and problem solving.
The physiotherapy focused on breathing, balance, relaxation
and increased understanding of the pain and pain coping.
The children underwent at least two treatment sessions, and
usually more, according to the expressed needs.
After the first study was finished, without significant results, a third group was constituted, Stomach Pain Clinic
Group C (n = 35) (for details, see Table S1). The children underwent a special form of treatment consisting of integrated
psychological and bodily treatment called psychosomatreatment (see Appendix S2) given by a therapist not involved
in the earlier study. The children received the treatment according to the wishes of the children and their parents in at
least two treatment sessions, and usually more.
In Stomach Pain Clinic Group C, a relatively large group
of children with a high pain score at inclusion remained high
at follow-up. In order to better understand whether these
children belonged to any special subgroup or not, the therapist was asked to divide the children into three subgroups,
without prior knowledge of the pain scores, and after the last
treatment, according to the child’s psychological difficulties:
one group of children with solvable problems, Group C 1,
one with solvable but recurrent problems, Group C 2, and
Group C 3 with long- standing, difficult-to-solve problems
(for details, see Table S1). A child in Group C 1 could be one

METHODS
Ethical approval by Huddinge Hospital (96/34; 163/00).

2 Group A, B and C also fulfilled the Walker and von Baeyer criteria
for RAP (17) which is a more precise version of Apley’s criteria.

Figure 1 A 10-year-old boy expresses his own stress experience in a drawing
in a rather typical picture for children under stress.

The muscular involvement in prolonged negative stress
leads to the development of tender points (TPs). They are
located in the proximal part of a muscle near the insertion
of the tendon (14). They are a sign of allodynia probably
caused by central, and possibly also peripheral, sensitisation.
Children do not normally have TPs. A typical pattern of TPs
is found in children with psychosomatic RAP (11).
A treatment method for psychosomatic RAP should effectively implement our knowledge of stress and its consequences for the brain and body by resolving psychosocial
problems, focusing on coping and improving body regulation of stress.
This article presents the results of a research project in
two steps to find an efficient treatment model including both
psychological and bodily care.
The basic assumptions are:

•
•

C

There is a disorder of RAP mainly caused by prolonged
negative stress, called here psychosomatic RAP, which can
be diagnosed according to defined criteria.
The prolonged negative stress reaction affects the muscular and hormonal systems, disturbs intestinal function and
can lead to recurrent pain.

2006 The Author(s)/Journal Compilation

C

2006 Foundation Acta Pædiatrica/Acta Pædiatrica 2007 96, pp. 76–81

77

Alfven and Lindstrom
´

Treatment of RAP

suffering from strong anxiety when starting school, which it
managed to control with some help from parents and the
therapist. A child in Group C 2 could be a child with marked
anxiety related to the parents’ divorce, which was manageable with the aid of the therapist, but which returned when
the parents had conflicts. A child in Group C 3 could be
one with dyslexia, school difficulties and/or a dysfunctional
divorced mother. Such a retrospective division was not possible for Stomach Pain Clinic Group A and B.
The reference group came from a pediatric outpatient
clinic in South Botkyrka, part of the southwestern suburban
area of Stockholm, during 1997–1999 and were followed up
after 1 year. No child from this area was referred to the Stomach Pain Clinic during these years. The group consisted of
the 18 children with a psychosomatic diagnosis out of 39
consecutive children consulting for RAP and meeting Apley’s criteria. (for details, see Table S1). A protocol comprising of pain, related symptoms and a medical history was
completed and a pain score was calculated at the first appointment and after 1 year. The psychosomatic diagnosis
was established by the first author from the case-note data
in journal for the children showing a relationship between
negative stress and RAP, organic disorder excluded, but not
strictly according to the criteria presented above. The other
21 of these 39 children had an organic or unclear diagnosis. No TPs were rated. The South Botkyrka area had an
employment rate of 78% and social welfare payments were
received by 4%. The psychosomatic RAP children in this
group received support and advice, but no special treatment
for their psychosomatic problems. No child was judged to
have problems demanding a psychiatric consultation.
Measurements
Pain intensity was measured on a visual analog scale (VAS),
which has been validated and tested for reliability with good
results for children over 6 years of age (15). Children older
than 6 can also express how often and for how long a particular pain endures. Pain scores were calculated at the first
consultation and after 1 year, based on ordinal data concerning frequency, intensity and duration (see Table S2). Three
children in group C aged 6, 6 and 10 years could only indicate if the pain intensity was mild, moderate, or severe and,
from this score, the pain was classified as 1, 2 and 3, respectively. These children also found it difficult to state the
duration and frequency of attacks. The parents then assisted
the child in arriving at a figure. The three scores of intensity,
frequency and duration of attack were summarized and resulted in an individual pain score between 3 and 9 and, if
pain free, the score was 0. No specific validation or test for
reliability has been performed for the pain score calculation
per se.
The children were palpated for TPs with a pressure of
about 100 kPa, tested with an algometer (Somedic) (18) at
eight different points according to a given pattern including,
bilaterally the medial part of the trapeziod muscles of the
shoulders, m. temporalis, m. subclavis, and the lateral insertion of m. pectoralis major, as children with psychosomatic
RAP often have such a pattern (19). TPs were rated (0–8)

78

C

and the difference between the score at inclusion and after 1
year was used as a measure of improvement. Not all children
were examined for TPs at the first examination because some
did not want to be examined for this or because of a lack
of time. Quite a few were not examined for TPs at followup, mostly because some of the follow-up were performed
as a telephone interview. Good routines for collecting pain
scores and TPs had been developed, which diminishes the
risk of information bias.

Statistics
The Statistica 6 program was used. Uni- and bivariate
analysis including the Mann–Whitney U test, Wilcoxon’s
paired test, linear logistic regression and Spearman’s correlations test were employed when appropriate as the data
were skewed. A P value of less than 0.05 was considered
significant.

RESULTS
Stomach pain clinic
The pain score improved under the year and differed significantly at follow-up (score 1 year) from the one found
at inclusion for all three Stomach Pain Clinic Groups. See
Table 3. A statistically significantly better difference in the
treatment outcome was found for Stomach Pain Clinic
Group C compared to Group B, but no difference in outcome was found between Stomach Pain Clinic Group A and
Stomach Pain Clinic Group B (see Table S4).
There was no statistical difference between younger children (6–9 years) and older children (10–18 years) concerning pain score at inclusion, after 1 year and pain score difference for Stomach Pain Clinic Group A, B and C studied
one by one and as a whole group. The children in Stomach
Pain Clinic Group C received a mean (range) of 10.0 (2–
37) treatment sessions, but the number of sessions did not
relate to outcome. In none of the groups, including the reference group, had gender any significant influence on the
outcome.
The children who found it difficult to solve problems, subgroup C 3, had a mean inclusion pain score of 8.3 and the
same score at follow-up. Subgroups C 1 and 2, respectively,
improved significantly (see Table S3), and significantly better than subgroup C 3 (P < 0.001). The TP score diminished
significantly in Stomach Pain Clinic Group A and C, but not
in Stomach Pain Clinic Group B (see Table S3). The correlation between the pain score and the TP for the children in
group A, B and C as a whole at the time of inclusion was
not significant (R = 0.02). At the 1-year follow-up, there was
a positive correlation for all groups together R = 0.47, P <
0.05.
In the reference group, seven out of 18 children (39%)
were pain free at a check-up after 1 year and the pain score
improved significantly. Stomach Pain Clinic Group C improved significantly better than the reference group, but not
the Stomach Pain Clinic A and B Group (see Table S4).

2006 The Author(s)/Journal Compilation

C

2006 Foundation Acta Pædiatrica/Acta Pædiatrica 2007 96, pp. 76–81

Alfven and Lindstrom
´

Treatment of RAP

DISCUSSION
The main results are:
For integrated psychological and somatic treatment given
by the same therapist (Stomach Pain Clinic Group C), the reduction in the pain score was significantly better compared
to Stomach Pain Clinic Group B (physiotherapy only) and
almost significantly better compared to Stomach Pain Clinic
Group A (psychological treatment and physiotherapy). No
difference was found between treatment outcomes in Stomach Pain Clinic Group A and B. In Stomach Pain Clinic
Group A and C, the TP scores improved significantly at
follow-up after 1 year and the pain score and TP score calculated for all groups correlated significantly after 1 year.
Possible bias when comparing groups
It is a well-known fact that not a few children with stressinduced RAP have a “spontaneous” recovery (20, 21), which
is certainly due to less stress and better coping as time goes
by. This was confirmed in the positive outcome for the reference group. This highlights the fact that improvement may
not be a treatment effect and that controlled studies are
needed. The risk of bias when comparing Stomach Pain
Clinic Group A and B was eliminated by randomisation.
Stomach Pain Clinic Group C was constituted in a nonrandomised manner, and therefore the possibility of systematic
errors needs to be analysed.
Selection bias
The same routines were used for inclusion and diagnosis of
the patients in all three Stomach Pain Clinic Groups, which
reduces the risk of a selection bias. Stomach Pain Clinic
Group C had higher pain scores, which could be an indication of selection. This was due to high scores in subgroup C
3 comprising children with problems difficult to solve. This
may be an indication that more difficult patients were referred to the Stomach Pain Clinic because the clinic was
better known and more difficult patients were referred to it
after some years of practice. This fact did not increase the
risk of an alpha error—it may have had the opposite effect.
Information bias
The enthusiasm for a new treatment may unconsciously
stimulate a tendency to adjust figures for better results, i.e.,
in this study, higher pain scores and more TPs at inclusion
and less at follow-up. Good routines reduce this risk. During the period when treatment in Stomach Pain Clinic A
was tested, it was just as new, perhaps even more, as the one
tested for Stomach Pain Clinic Group C, which is a reason
why a systematic error due to enthusiasm is less likely.
Measuring bias
The routines for inclusion and collecting data, including pain
scores, were the same for group Stomach Pain Clinic A, B
and C, which minimizes the risk of biased measurement. An
accurate pain score calculation requires that a child should
be able to give specific answers concerning pain intensity
and the frequency and duration of attacks. As mentioned
before, most children over 6 years of age are able to make an

C

2006 The Author(s)/Journal Compilation

C

appropriate VAS measurement. Three children in Stomach
Pain Clinic group C could only indicate if the pain intensity
was mild, moderate or severe and based on this, the scores
were classified as 1, 2 and 3, respectively. These children also
found it difficult to express the duration and frequency of attacks. In these cases, the parents assisted the child in arriving
at a figure. This decreases the accuracy of the pain score in
a random manner, but there is no indication of a systematic
information error and as the number of these children is low,
it should not influence the results.
TPs
The occurrence of TP was studied as a measure of stressinduced muscular reaction and was used as an outcome
measure. There are other reasons for the development of
TPs, such as central sensitisation of nonstress origin as seen
in fibromyalgia. This possibility has not been excluded and
thus it weakens the strength of TPs as an outcome measure.
Children can get sore muscles from exercise which might
influence pain sensitivity when pressure is applied. None of
the children explained their TPs in this manner, but a direct
question concerning this matter was not asked in more than
a few cases.
Children under acute stress may display central pain inhibition (22), which influences pain sensitivity and thus the
detection of TPs at examination. The stress at the first consultation may thus make some children fail to experience
TPs, but when under less stress at follow-up, the same child
may have TPs when examined (personal experience). This
could have reduced the TP count at inclusion and lessened
the chance of significant results. Worried children do often
exhibit central pain facilitation that can increase the experience of pain and TPs. This should not affect the results,
however.
The most frequent reason for not attending a follow-up
was that the child felt well and he or she or the parents were
not motivated to come for a clinical follow-up. This makes it
probable that the dropouts from the clinical follow-up as a
group had lower TP scores than the group as a whole. Thus,
dropouts did not increase the likelihood of a type I error, but
rather decreased it.
Comparisons between the reference group and the three
groups from the Stomach Pain Clinic are biased due to nonrandomisation and different diagnostic routines for the psychosomatic diagnosis. However, the findings of a statistical
significant difference between Stomach Pain Clinic Group
C and the reference group, but not for Group A and B,
strengthen the positive outcome for the psychosoma treatment and reduces the possibility that the improvement in
Stomach Pain Clinic Group A and B is an effect of treatment.
Several researchers in the field have suggested that a treatment should lead to at least a 50% decrease of pain to
be evaluated as effective (8). The group receiving psychosoma treatment had a 59% decrease of pain score. The results, however, must be seen as preliminary, as the control
group was not randomized, and comparison to other study
has to been done with respect to this. In a study published

2006 Foundation Acta Pædiatrica/Acta Pædiatrica 2007 96, pp. 76–81

79

Alfven and Lindstrom
´

Treatment of RAP

recently, Hicks and coworkers demonstrated an improvement for internet-based cognitive therapy of 72% after 3
months which was significantly better compared to a randomized control group (23). This difference could be due to
better effect of cognitive therapy, but could also be due to
difference in the diagnostic process, shorter follow-up time
and or less severe cases in their sample gathered after advertisements.
If prolonged negative stress is the cause of pain, a decrease in stress, better coping and an improvement in bodily
reactions should lead to reduced pain, which was found for
psychosoma treatment. The significant result for integrating
psychological and bodily treatment may indicate synergistic
effects of this combination of treatment. Stomach Pain Clinic
Group A, receiving psychological treatment and physiotherapy given separately, did not improve more than the reference group, which in this context is somewhat of a surprise.
This could be due to the small groups with low statistical
power. The skill of the individual therapist is, of course, important, and could influence the results.
The decrease in TPs with stress improvement as shown in
Stomach Pain Clinic group C and the correlation between
the pain score and TPs at the 1-year follow-up suggest that
that muscular stress is important in psychosomatic RAP. The
reason why no correlation between these parameters was
found at the time of inclusion might be that muscular stress
could be an on–off reaction and that one will find a correlation only when comparing children with and without
prolonged stress.
The significant difference in outcome between children
with solvable psychological problems and those with problems difficult to solve indicates that psychosomatic pain is
difficult to treat successfully without solving social and psychological problems leading to stress relief. Just as cancer
therapy patients are divided into different subgroups based
on the prognosis and effect of the treatment, children with
prolonged negative stress can be divided into different subgroups to increase both our understanding and the statistical
power.
The children in the reference group, not including any
tertiarily referred children, may have less severe stress and
pain and problems that are easier to solve. Thus, the lack
of a statistical difference between the reference group and
Stomach Pain Clinic Group A and C may involve a selection
bias leading to a type II error. At the same time, this fact
strengthens the statistical difference between Stomach Pain
Clinic Group C and the reference group.
CONCLUSIONS
A special method for integrated psychological and somatic
treatment is probably an effective mode of treatment for children with psychosomatic RAP. These children show a special
pattern of TPs related to their disorder, which diminish with
improvement in the disorder.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thanks Drs Robert Szigeti and Bjarne Johansson for collecting the data on the reference group, Penny

80

C

Fagerberg, psychologist and Maija-Liisa Linderson, physiotherapist for the therapeutic work in Stomach Pain Clinic
Group A and B and the FRF and Forsta Majblomman for
¨
the financial support that made this study possible.

References
1. Rasquin-Weber A, Hyman PE, Cucchiara S, Fleisher DR,
Hyams JS, Milla PJ et al. Childhood functional gastrointestinal
disorders. Gut 1999; 45(Suppl 2): II60–8.
2. Berntsson LT, Kohler L, Gustafsson JE. Psychosomatic
complaints in schoolchildren: a Nordic comparison. Scand J
Public Health 2001; 29: 44–54.
3. Robinson JO, Alverez JH, Dodge JA. Life events and family
history in children with recurrent abdominal pain. J
Psychosom Res 1990; 34: 171–81.
4. Di Lorenzo C, Youssef NN, Sigurdsson L, Scharff L, Griffiths J,
Wald A. Visceral hyperalgesia in children with functional
abdominal pain. J Pediatr 2001; 139: 838–43.
5. Arnold L, Barton ML, Beardslee RT, Brown JA, Carnahan JA,
Christie DJ. Childhood stress. New York, Chichester, Brisbane,
Toronto, Singapore: John Wiley & Sons Inc., 1990.
6. Weydert JA, Ball TM, Davis MF. Systematic review of
treatments for recurrent abdominal pain. Pediatrics 2003; 111:
e1–11.
7. Cardinal RN, Parkinson JA, Hall J, Everitt BJ. Emotion and
motivation: the role of the amygdala, ventral striatum, and
prefrontal cortex. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2006; 26: 321–52.
8. Eccleston C, Morley S, Williams A, Yorke L,
Mastroyannopoulou K. Systematic review of randomised
controlled trials of psychological therapy for chronic pain in
children and adolescents, with a subset meta-analysis of pain
relief. Pain 2002; 99: 157–65.
9. Alfven G. One hundred cases of recurrent abdominal pain in
children: diagnostic procedures and criteria for a
psychosomatic diagnosis. Acta Pediatr 2003; 92: 43–9.
10. Walker LS, Lipani TA, Greene JW, Caines K, Stutts J, Polk DB,
et al. Recurrent abdominal pain: symptom subtypes based on
the Rome II Criteria for pediatric functional gastrointestinal
disorders. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2004; 38: 187–91.
11. Alfven G. Psychosomatic pain in children: a psychomuscular
tension reaction? Eur J Pain 1997; 1: 5–14; discussion 14–5.
12. Alfven G. Plasma oxytocin in children with recurrent
´
abdominal pain. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2004; 38: 513–7.
13. Alfven G. Assessment of muscular tension in children. Int J
Behav Med 2003; 10: 174–80.
14. Wolfe F, Smythe HA, Yunus MB, Bennett RM, Bombardier C,
Goldenberg DL, et al. The American College of Rheumatology
1990 criteria for the classification of fibromyalgia. Report of
the Multicenter Criteria Committee. Arthritis Rheum 1990; 33:
160–72.
15. McGrath P. Pain in children. Nature, Assessment, Treatment.
New York: The Guilford Publications, Inc., 1990.
16. Apley J. The Child with Abdominal Pains. Oxford: Blackwell,
1975.
17. von Baeyer CL, Walker L. Children with recurrent abdominal
pain: Issues in the selection and description of research
participants. Dev Behav Pediatr 1999; 5: 307–12.
18. Alfven G. The pressure pain threshold (PPT) of certain
´
muscles in children suffering from recurrent abdominal pain of
non-organic origin. An algometric study. Acta Pediatr 1993;
82: 481–3.
19. Alfven G. Preliminary findings on increased muscle tension
´
and tenderness, and recurrent abdominal pain in children. A
clinical study. Acta Paediatr 1993; 82: 400–3.

2006 The Author(s)/Journal Compilation

C

2006 Foundation Acta Pædiatrica/Acta Pædiatrica 2007 96, pp. 76–81

Alfven and Lindstrom
´

Treatment of RAP

20. Apley J, Hale B. Children with recurrent abdominal pain: how
do they grow up? Br Med J 1973; 3: 7–9.
21. Magni G, Pierri M, Donzelli F. Recurrent abdominal pain in
children: a long term follow-up. Eur J Pediatr 1987; 146: 72–4.
22. The pain system in normal and pathological states: a primer
for clinicians. Seattle: IASP Press, 2004.
23. Hicks CL, von Baeyer CL, McGrath PJ. Online psychological
treatment for pediatric recurrent pain: A randomized
evaluation. J Pediatr Psychol, 2005.

Supplementary material
The following supplementary material is available for this
article:
Table S1 Age, gender and duration of pain for children in
the different groups

C

2006 The Author(s)/Journal Compilation

C

Table S2 Pain Score Calculation
Table S3 Pain Scores and Tender Points for Different Groups
Table S4 Statistical Difference vs Different Groups
Appendix S1
Appendix S2
This material is available as part of the online article from:
http://www.blackwell-synergy.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.16512227.2006.00028.x
(This link will take you to the article abstract).
Please note: Blackwell Publishing are not responsible for
the content or functionality of any supplementary materials
supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than missing
material) should be directed to the corresponding author
for the article.

2006 Foundation Acta Pædiatrica/Acta Pædiatrica 2007 96, pp. 76–81

81