ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Indian Journal of Psychiatry, 2004, 46(4)333-341

Escitalopram Versus Citalopram And Sertraline: A Double–Blind Controlled,
Multi-centric Trial in Indian Patients with Unipolar Major Depression
Vaya Lalit*1, Appaya Prakash M.2, Hegde Rajendra P.3, Mital Anukant K.4, Mittal Sunil5, Nagpal
Rajesh6, Palaniappun Vaiapuri7, Ramsubramaniam C.8, Rao Gundugurti P.9, Roy Krishna.10,
Trivedi Jitendra K.11, Vankar Ganpat K.12, Karan Rajesh S.1, Shah Sweety1, Patel Ronak B.1
ABSTRACT
The present randomized, double blind, parallel group, controlled, multi-centric trial was designed to evaluate the efficacy and tolerability
of escitalopram in comparison with citalopram and sertraline in the treatment of major depressive disorder. Outpatients (N=<n>214</n>) with an
ongoing/newly diagnosed ICD-10 major depressive episode and a Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D) score of > 18 were
randomly assigned to citalopram, 20–40 mg/day (74 patients), escitalopram, 10–20 mg/day (69 patients) and sertraline, 50-150 mg/day
(71 patients), for a 4-week double-blind treatment period, with dosage adjustment (after 2 weeks of treatment) according to the response
to treatment. Clinical response was evaluated by the 17 items HAM-D and the Clinical Global Impression (CGI) scales, which were
recorded at baseline and at weekly intervals. Tolerability was evaluated by observed/spontaneously reported adverse changes in
laboratory parameters (baseline and after 4 weeks). Response rate was defined as a decrease in HAM-D score by 50% from baseline and
remission rate was defined as a HAM-D score of < 8. Response rate at the end of two week were 58% for escitalopram (10mg/day), 49%
for citalopram (20mg/day) and 52% for sertraline (50-100mg/day). Response rate at the end of four week were 90% for escitalopram (1020mg/day), 86% for citalopram (20-40mg/day) and 97% for sertraline (100-150mg/day). The Remission rates at the end of four weeks
were 74% for escitalopram, 65% for citalopram and 77% for sertraline. Adverse experiences were reported by 45% of patients in
escitalopram group, 58% patients in citalopram and 56% patients in the sertraline group. Additionally, there were lesser dropouts and
lesser requirement for dose escalation in escitalopram than in citalopram and sertraline group. In conclusion Escitalopram, the Senantiomer of the citalopram is a safe and effective antidepressant in the Indian population. It has potentially superior efficacy than
citalopram and a comparable efficacy to sertraline with fewer side effects than both citalopram and sertraline.
Key Words : Escitalopram, Sertraline, Citalopram, SSRI’s.

Introduction

development of that single isomer could improve both risks
and benefits over the original antidepressant compound.

Chirality, potentially offers one method to improve upon
the SSRI (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) class. If
all the serotonin reuptake inhibitory activity of racemic SSRI
antidepressant resides in single isomer, it would be expected
to be more potent than the racemate, and it might also be
more selective (Hutt 2000; Tucker 2000). Thus, the clinical

Escitalopram is the S-enantiomer of citalopram (SSRI); a
racemic compound that has been demonstrated to be
effective in the treatment of depression, panic disorder,
premenstrual dysphoric disorder, and obsessive- compulsive
disorder (Willetts, 1999; Joubert, 1999; Keller, 2000).

1

Department of Clinical Research, Torrent Research Centre, Village Bhat, Dist. Gandhinagar-382 428. E-mail : lalitvaya@torrentpharma.com.

2

Department of Psychiatry, St. John’s Medical college & Hospital, Bangalore.

3

Consultant Psychiatrist, Goa.

4

Department of Psychiatry, Rajiv Gandhi Medical college & Chattrapati shivaji Hospital, Thane.

5

Consultant Psychiatrist & Psychotherapist, Delhi Psychiatry center, Delhi.

6

Consultant Psychiatrist, Manobal Klinik, Delhi.

7

Department of Psychiatry, Madras medical college & research institute, Chennai.

8

Consultant Psychiatrist, M.S. Chellamuthu Trust & Research foundation, Madurai.

9

Consultant psychiatrist, Woodland Asha Neuro Psychiatric center, Hyderabad.
Department of Psychiatry, N.R.S. Medical College, Kolkatta.

10
11

Department of Psychiatry, K. G. Medical College Lucknow.
Department of Psychiatry, B.J. medical College and Civil hospital, Ahmedabad.

12

* Correspondence

333

Vaya Lalit et al

Substantial evidence indicates that escitalopram is
responsible for the therapeutic efficacy of the racemate
(Owens 2001). Escitalopram is over 100 times more potent
as serotonin reuptake inhibitor than its stereoisomer, Rcitalopram (Hyttel 1992; Sanchez 2000). In vivo studies of
antidepressant action also support this conclusion;
escitalopram is more potent and as efficacious as citalopram
in various animal models of depression (Hyttel 1992;
Mitchell 2001; Sanchez 2000; Montgomery 2001).

schizoaffective or bipolar disorder, 6) seizure disorder, 7)
anorexia nervosa, 8) hepatic and renal system dysfunction,
9) therapy with lithium within the preceding month, 10)
treatment with cimetidine, warfarin or MAO inhibitors, 11)
hypersensitivity to citalopram, escitalopram and sertraline
and non responders to citalopram and sertraline. Women
of childbearing age not using contraceptives, pregnant
women, lactating mothers, women desiring to have children,
were also excluded.

Escitalopram is therefore expected to offer several
advantages over citalopram. Escitalopram theoretically
should have at least twice the antidepressant potency of
citalopram, since the therapeutic effects of citalopram are
thought to be dependent upon serotonin reuptake inhibition
and escitalopram appears to be responsible for virtually all
of the serotonin reuptake inhibition produced by citalopram.
Moreover, if any adverse effects of racemic citalopram
were attributable to the R- enantiomer, they would be
avoided in patients treated with the pure S- enantiomer.

Study Design
The multi-centric trial was spread over diverse geographical
locations in India. The study protocol was approved by the
Institutional Review Boards for all participating study
centers and by the Drug Regulatory Authority of India (Drug
Controller General of India). The patients gave a signed
informed consent before any study-related procedure
(including screening) could be undertaken.
Patients underwent a comprehensive psychiatric and
physical examination and appropriate investigations including
hematology, biochemistry, ECG and urine pregnancy test
(females). Patients meeting eligibility criteria at screening
were enrolled in the study. Category I patients (Newly
diagnosed) were started on drug therapy immediately.
Category II patients (Non-responders) were started on trial
drugs after a 1-week, single blind, placebo washout period
(4 week for fluoxetine).

The present multi-centric, parallel group study, examined
the safety and efficacy of escitalopram in comparison with
citalopram and sertraline (current standards of treatment)
in Indian patients with major depressive disorder.
Methods
A total of 11 centers in India participated in this controlled,
randomized, double–blind, single dummy, titrable dose,
parallel group, multi-centric study.

In order to maintain the blind, all double blind study
medication was administered in alu- alu (aluminum –
aluminum) strips. No other psychotropic drugs were allowed
except a sedative/hypnotic (Benzodiazepine/
Nonbenzodiazepine) for treatment emergent anxiety/
insomnia.

Patients:
Eligible participants were male or female outpatients, 18 to
65 years of age, with ICD-10 diagnosis of Major Depressive
Episode and a minimum score of 18 on the Hamilton Rating
Scale for Depression (HAM-D).

Follow-up visits

Categories of patients included were:

Follow-up visits were after 1,2, 3 & 4 weeks of double
blind treatment. Efficacy assessments included the 17-items
HAM-D scale, CGI-I and CGI-S scale. Adverse events
were enquired and recorded at every visit.
Electrocardiogram (ECG), physical examination, and
laboratory tests were performed at screening and at the
end of week 4.

I. Newly diagnosed patients
II. Previously diagnosed patients not responding to the
prescribed antidepressants
Patients were excluded if they had 1) recent ongoing
significant non-psychiatric medical disorder, 2) a history of
substance abuse, 3) chronic suicidal ideation and behavior,
4) participated in any drug trial within 4 weeks, 5)

Drugs and Dose Administration
The drugs were administered in the following manner as
stated in the table below :
334

Escitalopram Versus Citalopram And Sertraline
Escitalopram

Citalopram

Sertraline

Morning

Evening

Morning

Evening

Morning

Evening

Wk 1

Placebo

10mg

Placebo

20mg

Placebo

50mg

Wk 2

Placebo

10mg

Placebo

20mg

Placebo

100mg

If HAM-D score decrease 50% from the baseline after two weeks, the same dose was continued. Otherwise
the dose was titrated upwards.
Responder

Non- Responder

Responder

Non- Responder

Responder

Non- Responder

Morn

Eve

Morn

Eve

Morn

Eve

Morn

Eve

Morn

Eve

Morn

Eve

Wk 3

P

10 mg

P

20mg

P

20mg

P

40mg

P

100mg

50 mg 100mg

Wk 4

P

10 mg

P

20mg

P

20mg

P

40mg

P

100mg

50 mg 100mg

Note: P= Placebo; Responder = HAM-D score reduced by 50% from the baseline; Morn = morning and Eve = Evening

Of Variance (RMANOVA) with baseline as covariate
followed by Bonferroni post hoc test for week-by-week
comparison between the treatment groups.

Primary Efficacy Measures
1) Change in HAM-D total score (The sum of all 17 items).
2) CGI –S score and CGI –I score.

CGI-S and CGI-I scores were subjected to chi-square test
for finding within-group significance.

3) Response rate: HAM-D score decrease by 50% from
baseline.

Laboratory investigations data was first checked for its
normality. If found normal, the data was subjected to
parametric test (paired t test). Otherwise, the data was
subjected to Non-Parametric (Wilcoxon Sing Rank) test
for checking significance from baseline to last visit.

4) Remission rate: HAM-D score below 8.
Safety and Tolerability Measures
All adverse events volunteered, observed and enquired
during the study or within 6 days of the last day of treatment
were recorded. Additional information on the adverse event
included date of onset, duration of event, concurrent
therapies, the investigator’s assessment of severity, possible
cause relationship to study drug, and whether a change in
dose or withdrawal of treatment was required. A 12 lead
ECG was done at baseline and at the end of the study.
Clinical laboratory tests, including routine hematology, serum
chemistry and liver function tests were carried out at
baseline and at end of study.

Treatment group comparisons of patient’s demographic
characteristics and baseline severity measurements were
done using chi-square test and ANOVA. Fisher’s exact
test was used for categorical data where cell numbers were
small. Statistical significance was defined as 2-sided p value
< 0.05.
Results
Demography

Statistical Analysis

A total of 214 patients were randomized (balanced
randomization) to receive either Escitalopram or Citalopram
or Sertraline in the study. The demographic data for the
patients are shown in Table 1. There was no statistically
significant difference in the various demographic
characteristics like age, gender, illness duration and illness
severity among the treatment groups.

The three treatment groups were compared for the change
in scores (from baseline) on various psychiatric scales. With
the purpose of Intention To Treat (ITT), Last Observation
Carried Forward (LOCF) approach was used.
Since the data for HAM-D were measured on ordinal scale,
the data for these two parameters were subjected to NonParametric tests. The total HAM-D scores at each followup visit were subjected to Wilcoxon sign rank test for finding
significant change from baseline (within group comparison).
The data was subjected to Repeated Measures Analysis

16 patients dropped out from the study. Of the 16 patients,
9 were in the Sertraline group, 3 in the Citalopram group
and 4 in the Escitalopram group. The reasons for the dropout
from the study are presented in Table 2.
335

Vaya Lalit et al
Table 1.

Efficacy

DEMOGRAPHIC PROFILE OF PATIENTS
Escitalopram
(N=69)

Citalopram
(N=74)

Males (n)

30

30

36

Females (n)

39

43

35

33+8

33+9

37+11

Duration of illness
(Median months)

5.5

4

5

History of suicide
attempt (n)

3

2

1

25 + 5

25 + 4

17

20

17

20 + 1

19 + 1

20 + 1

52

54

54

28+5

27+4

The HAM-D score showed a significant decrease from
baseline (within group) at each weekly assessment in the
three treatment groups (Figure 1). However the difference
between groups was not statistically significant at any
assessment.

Sertraline
(N=71)

27+4

Age (years) (Mean+S.D.)

Severity of illness
(HAM-D Score)(Mean+SD) 26 + 6

Fig. 1. HAM-D scores, mean change from baseline

Severe (HAM-D=18-21)
(n)
HAM-D Score (Mean+SD)
Very Severe (HAM-D>21)
(n)
HAM-D Score (Mean+SD)
Table 2.
Reasons

No significant difference was observed between treatments, when the
data was subjected to RMANOVA with baseline as covariate followed
by Bonferroni post hoc test for week-by-week comparison.

The assessment of global improvement (CGI-I) showed
that a statistically significant improvement (over baseline)
occurred at the end of the study in each treatment group
(Figure 2). However the difference between treatment
groups was not statistically significant.

DROP OUTS
Escitalopram

Citalopram
2

Sertraline

ADRs

1

Discontinuation on
Pt’s. request

1

0

1

Loss of
efficacy

0

1

0

Reason not
mentioned

2

0

3

Other
Reasons

0

0

1

Total

4

3

9

a

b1-2

4c1-4

Fig. 2: CGI-S Scores. Mean change from baseline

a= Mild headache, nervousness & agitation which were
considered of ‘probable’ causality. Headache required
prescription medication. Study drug was discontinued.
b1= Throbbing headache which was considered of ‘certain’
causality. Headache required prescription medication. Study
drug was discontinued.

The severity of illness (CGI-S) decreased significantly
with each of the treatment (Figure 3). The between
treatment comparison did not show statistically significant
difference at any assessment visit.

b2= Study drug was discontinued after only 3 days of
treatment because of G.I. side effects.
c1= Nausea & vomiting of moderate severity which were
considered of ‘certain’ causality and required prescription
medication. Study drug was discontinued.

Response rate at end of week 2 : A 50% reduction (from
baseline) in the total HAM-D score was observed in 58%
patients in Escitalopram group (10mg) as compared to 49%
in the Citalopram group (20 mg) and 52% in the Sertraline
group (100mg) at the end of two weeks of treatment
(Figure 4).

c2-3= Study drug was discontinued because of severe
headache.
c4= Giddiness, vomiting & throbbing headache of moderate
severity which were considered of ‘certain’ causality and
required prescription medication. Study drug was
discontinued.

336

Escitalopram Versus Citalopram And Sertraline

Fig. 3: CGI-S Scores. Mean change from baseline

Remission rate : is defined as decrease in HAM-D total
score to < 7. In Escitalopram group the remission rate was
74% as compared to 65% in Citalopram and 77% in
Sertraline group patients after 4 weeks of treatment (Figure
6).
Fig. 6: Remitted Cases at end of Week-4

Fig. 4: Responders at Week-2

Effect on Patients continued for 6 weeks : Data from 88
patients who were continued for 6 weeks on study treatment
showed that the trend (of change in HAM-D score in three
groups) that was seen in the first four weeks was maintained
over the next two weeks (Figure 7).
Fig. 7: HAM-D scores, mean change from baseline
(6 weeks)

Response rate at the end of week 4 : Response rate after
4 weeks of treatment was 90% in Escitalopram group, 86%
in Citalopram and 97% in Sertraline group patients
(Figure 5).
Fig. 5: Responders at Week-4

No significant difference was observed between treatments, when the
data was subjected to RMANOVA with baseline as covariate followed
by Bonferroni post hoc test for week-by-week comparison.

Onset of action :
Proportionately more patients responded to Escitalopram
(58%) and Sertraline (52%) as compared to Citalopram
(49%) in the first two weeks of the therapy (Figure 8).

337

Vaya Lalit et al

Most of the adverse events were mild in severity (Figure
9). Proportionately more people required OTC / prescription
drugs in the Citalopram and Sertraline group as compared
to Escitalopram (Figure 10). Most of these adverse events
were causally not related to the drug treatment.

Fig. 8: Onset of Action / Onset of Response

Fig. 9: Severity of ADR’s

Safety:
No serious adverse event was reported by any patient in
the three treatment groups. The percentage of patients
reporting adverse events was 45% in the Escitalopram
group, 56%in the Sertraline group and 58% in the Citalopram
group. No unexpected side effect was reported. The most
common adverse events were headache [Sertraline (41%),
Citalopram (24%), Escitalopram (17%)], gastrointestinal
side effects [Sertraline (17%), Citalopram (15%),
Escitalopram (9%)], giddiness [Sertraline (23%), Citalopram
(14%), Escitalopram (10%)] and insomnia [Sertraline
(13%), Citalopram (20%), Escitalopram (19%)] (Table 3).
Table 3.

Note: Many subjects had more than one ADR

Fig. 10: Management of ADR’s

ADVERSE DRUG REACTIONS (ADR)
Escitalo- Citalopram
pram

N

69

Patients having ADR’s

n(%)

Dropouts due to ADR’s n
Headache

n(%)

74

Sertraline
71

31(45)

43(58)

1

2

40(56)
4

12(17)

18(24)

29(41)

G.I. Side Effects

n(%)

6(9)

11(15)

12(17)

Giddiness

n(%)

7(10)

10(14)

16(23)

Insomnia

n(%)

13(19)

15(20)

9(13)

Anxiety

n(%)

1(1)

3(4)

1(1)

Tremors

n(%)

5(7)

7(9)

3(4)

Agitation

n(%)

2(3)

5(7)

2(3)

Abnormal Ejaculation

n(%)

2(3)

Libido Decreased

n(%)

0(0) $

1(1) $

2(3) $

Other ADR’s #

n

20(29)

23(31)

14(20)

$

3(4)

$

1(1)

◆

Sexual side effects (males) were reported by only a few
patients in this trial. This is possibly because of the discomfort
patients’ feel in reporting such events.

Note: patients may have had more than one ADR’s

◆

Note: Some patients had more than one treatment

$

$ = Incidence corrected for gender

◆

The laboratory investigations like hematology, biochemistry
and ECG, carried out before and after treatment did not

# = Restlessness, Dry mouth, Somnolence, Yawning,
Itching, Diaphoresis, Asthenia

338

Escitalopram Versus Citalopram And Sertraline

show any clinically significant change from baseline in any
treatment group.

Fig. 13: Total Remitters After Dose Escalation

Dose response:
Proportionately more patients responded (58%) and remitted
(23%) to initial dose (10mg) of Escitalopram as compared
to Citalopram (49% & 19% respectively) and Sertraline
(52% & 17% respectively) (Figure 11). On increasing the
dose, the response and remission rate in Citalopram group
were 86% & 65% respectively, as compared to Sertraline
(97% & 77% respectively), and Escitalopram group (90%
and 74% respectively), after four week of therapy (Figure
12 & 13).
Fig. 11: Responders / Remitters To Initial Dosages

Fig. 14: Dose Adverse Events Relationship

Fig. 12: Total Responders After Dose Escalation

32

45
Discussion

37

Enantiomers are non-superimposable, mirror-image type of
isomers that have identical physio-chemical properties.
They are distinguished on the basis of the differences in
their ability to rotate polarised light.
Importantly, they can have different biological properties
(pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic). This is because
various receptors and other target proteins have chiral
molecules in them and show stereo selectivity.
Recent advances in chiral technology and the ability to
synthesize enantiomerically pure compounds, together with
regulatory influences (FDA’s Policy 1992, Brussells, CPMP
1993), have led the pharmaceutical industry to attempt,
wherever relevant and possible, to develop new chemical

Most of the adverse events occurred during the initiation
of the therapy i.e. with the initial dosages. Increasing the
dose did not result in corresponding increase in the adverse
events (Figure 14).
339

Vaya Lalit et al

entities as single isomers. In parallel, there has been interest
in “chiral switching”, the replacement of an already
approved racemate by a single enantiomer. Potential
advantages of chiral switching include an improved
therapeutic index through increased potency and selectivity
and decreased side effects; an improved onset and duration
of effect; and a decreased propensity for drug-drug
interactions.

week 1 onwards (observed cases). By comparison,
citalopram 20 mg/day did not demonstrate a statistically
significant effect compared to placebo indicating faster onset
of action of escitalopram. The difference between the active
treatment groups was not statistically significant (William
2002).
In a meta-analysis by Azorin J.M. et al. (2004), data were
pooled (506 patients) from three different clinical trials, each
similar in design and inclusion/exclusion criteria, primary
endpoints and assessment schedules. Among them, 169
received escitalopram, 171 received citalopram and 166
received the placebo. The primary efficacy parameter was
the mean change from baseline to end of treatment in
MADRS total score between escitalopram and citalopram
groups. The change from baseline to endpoint of the
Hamilton rating scale for Depression (HAM-D) and the
Clinical Global Impression of Improvement and Severity
(CGI-I and CGI-S) were also analysed as secondary
criteria. Results showed that the mean change from baseline
in the MADRS total score was significantly higher in the
escitalopram group compared with the citalopram group (17.3 vs - 13.8 respectively, p=0.003). This significant
difference was observed as early as week 1 (p=0.01).
Response rates were significantly higher for escitalopram
than for citalopram (56% vs 41% respectively, p=0.007).
A borderline significant difference was found for remission
rate in the observed-cases analysis (43% vs 33%
respectively, p=0.07). Analyses of the HAM-D, CGI-I and
CGI-S scores revealed consistent results. Sanchez C et al.
(2004) reached to similar conclusions in their meta-analysis.

Current therapy of depression requires improvement in many
areas including 1) a requirement for a faster onset of action
than provided by the current therapies [2-4 weeks]; 2) an
increase in response rate; 3) a better long-term efficacy
and safety; 4) efficacy in resistant depression; 5) efficacy
in associated anxiety; 6) lesser number of dropouts.
Can chiral switching of the available antidepressants help
in achieving these unmet needs in the therapy of depression?
This question was explored in the present study where the
S(-)enantiomer of citalopram was compared against the
standard anti-depressants sertraline and racemic citalopram.
The results of the study show that escitalopram produced
greater mean changes in the HAM-D scores than
citalopram through out the study period. There was also a
proportionately higher response/ remission rate than
citalopram. The differences however, could not reach
statistical significance. This is mainly because of a small
sample size. The trial was not designed (in terms of the
subject numbers) to look for statistically significant
differences between treatment groups. It was a trial done
mainly to see the efficacy and safety of Escitalopram, the
new antidepressant drug in Indian patients of major
depression.

In vitro studies show that escitalopram has no or very low
affinity for serotonergic or other receptors including alphaand beta-adrenergic, dopamine, histamine, muscarinic, and
benzodiazepine receptors. This suggests a very safe adverse
effect profile. The common treatment emergent adverse
events reported for escitalopram include insomnia, nausea,
diarrhea and dizziness.

Data from 118 patients who were followed for additional
two weeks (total of six weeks) was available. These patients
were evenly distributed among the three treatment groups.
The efficacy of the three drugs was minimally enhanced
over the additional 2 weeks. As seen in the Figure 7, clear
separation of escitalopram group profile from citalopram
was maintained throughout the 6-weeks. Sertraline profile
caught up with the escitalopram profile at week-4.

Similar side effect profile was seen in the present trial. In
addition, headache was also reported commonly in this study.
No adverse events were serious enough to require
hospitalization. Majority of adverse events were mild to
moderate in severity and required no treatment, resolving
on their own over 2-5 days. In all treatment groups, the
adverse events occurred mainly in the first two weeks of
therapy. Adverse events occurred more frequently and
with more severity in the citalopram and sertraline group.
Consequently, there were greater dropouts in the sertraline
group and more patients in sertraline and citalopram group

In the pivotal clinical trials conducted for the regulatory
submission to USFDA, Escitalopram was seen to be more
effective than placebo as assessed by standard study
endpoints (change in MADRS, HAM-D & CGI scores) in
randomized, double blind studies in patients with major
depression. Efficacy analysis showed a significantly superior
therapeutic effect for escitalopram versus placebo from
340

Escitalopram Versus Citalopram And Sertraline

required ‘Over The Counter’ and ‘prescription medicine’
for the treatment of these adverse events.

References
Azorin J.M., Llorca P.M., Despiegel N., Verpillat P., (2004). Escitalopram
is more effective than citalopram for the treatment of severe major
depressive disorder. Encephale 30(2) : 158-66.

There was one pointer to the claimed early onset of action
of escitalopram in the present trial. This included a higher
response rate to escitalopram in the first two weeks of
therapy than citalopram/sertraline. It is possible that the
response rate was less in sertraline group because the
patients were on 100mg dose only for 1 week. However,
the dosing regimen chosen for sertraline is the one, which
is recommended in the package insert (ZOLOFT®).

Committee for Proprietary Medical Products. Working Parties on Quality,
safety and Efficacy of Medicinal Products. Note for guidance: Investigational
of chiral active substance (III/3501/91). (1993), Brussells : CPMP.
FDA’s Policy statement on the development of new stereoisomeric drugs
(stereomeric Drug Policy) Federal Register 1992;57: FR22249.
Hutt A.J., Tan S.C. (1996) Drug Chirality and its clinical significance.
Drugs, 52, 1-12
Hyttel J., Boges K.P. et al.(1992) The pharmacological effect of Citalopram
resides in the (S)-(+)-enantiomer. Journal of Neurological Transmission
General Section 88,157-160

Higher % of patients responded / remitted to 10 mg dose
of escitalopram as compared to the initial dosage of
citalopram (20 mg) & sertraline (50-100 mg). Dose
escalation requirement was therefore less in escitalopram
treated group.

Janet, B.W. & Williams, D.S.W. (2000) Clinical Global Impressions (CGI)
Scale, pp 100-102, Washington DC, American Psychiatric Association
Joubert A.F., Stein DJ.(1999) Citalopram and anxiety disorders. Review of
Contemporary Pharmacotherapy, 10, 79-123
Keller M.B.(2000) Citalopram therapy for depression: a review of 10
years of European experience and data from US clinical trials. Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry, 61:896-908

Conclusion

Mitchell P.J., Hogg S.(2001) Behavioural effects of Escitalopram predicts
potent antidepressant acitivity. In:New Research Abstracts of the 154 th
Annual Meeting of the American Psychiatric Association; May 9, New
Orleans, La. Abstract NR 503:136-137

Chiral switching of racemic Citalopram to S (+) citalopram
has resulted in a drug twice as potent as the racemic mixture.
Additionally escitalopram has been shown to be more
effective and better-tolerated drug than citalopram. It has
also proved to be an equieffective and a safer alternative
to Sertraline.

Montgomery S.A., Loft H. et al (2001) Escitalopram (S-enantiomer of
Citalopram): clinical efficacy and onset of action predicted from a rat
model. Pharmacological Toxicology, 88, 282-286
Owens M.J., Knight D.L., (2001) Second generation SSRIS: human
monoamine transporter binding profile of Escitalopram and R-fluoxetine.
Biological Psychiatry , 50, 345-350

Source of funding:

Sanchez C., Brennum Lt.(2000) The S-enantiomer of Citalopram is a
highly selective and potent serotonin reuptake inhibitor. Presented at the
55 th annual meeting of the Society of Biological Psychiatry; May 11-13,
Chicago, III

This paper is based on the clinical trial sponsored by Torrent Pharmaceuticals
Ltd.,

Sanchez C., Hogg S.(2000) The antidepressant effect of Citalopram resides
in the S-enantiomer. Presented at the 40 th annual meeting of the New
Clinical Drug Evaluation Unit; Boca Raton , Florida

Acknowledgements:
Many thanks to Mr. Hitesh Dave for typing and formatting the article and
all the other help during the conduct of the trial.

Sanchez C., Bogeso K.P., Ebert B., Reines E.H., Braestrup C., (2004)
Escitalopram versus citalopram: the surprising role of the R-enantiomer.
Psychopharmacology , 174 (2), 163 - 176
Tucker G.T. (2000) Chiral switches. Lancet, 355, 1085-1087
Willetts J., Lippa A.(1999) Clinical development of Citalopram. Journal
of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 19, 36S-46S.
Yonkers, K.A. & Samson J. (2000) Hamilton Rating Scale For Depression
(Ham-D), pp 526-529, Washington DC, American Psychiatric Association

341