CONGENITAL NASOLACRIMAL DUCT
OBSTRUCTION IN THE SECOND YEAR OF LIFE:
A MULTICENTRE TRIAL OF MANAGEMENT
\

J. D. H. YOUNG

c. J. MacEWEN! and S. A. OGSTON2

Dundee

Collaborating surgeons: G. J. Bedford, Dumfries; W. Church, Aberdeen; L. Esakowitz, Paisley; D. Holding,
Glasgow; E. G. Kemp, Ayr; C. J. MacEwen, Dundee, G. T. Millar, Edinburgh; J. D. H. Young, Dundee

SUMMARY
We

studied

spontaneous

resolution

of

congenital

nasolacrimal duct obstruction in the second year of
life and compared this with the cure rate after probings

undertaken between the ages of 11 and 15 months. Of
the 111 eyes of <n>95</n> patients studied, 26 eyes were

included in a randomised prospective comparison of
probing with spontaneous resolution. A further 63 eyes

followed a similar management plan to the randomised
group and are reported as an observational study.

Thirty of the 50 eyes followed up without treatment

resolved spontaneously before the age of 2 years, of

which 24 resolved before 18 months. The overall cure

rate for probing was 74% compared with 60% for
spontaneous resolution. At 15 months of age the
randomised study confirmed that probing at 12-14

months is an effective intervention compared with
spontaneous resolution (p

=

0.04). At 24 months of age

probing was superior in both randomised and non­
randomised studies, but with increased numbers in the
spontaneous resolution groups the difference was no
longer statistically significant. Up to 18 months of age

the frequency of spontaneous resolution makes delay in
probing a viable management option to be discussed
with the parents. It will also lead to an overestimate of
the cure rate in any study of interventional treatment
unless controls are included.

Congenital nasolacrimal duct obstruction (CNLDO)
is a common problem affecting up to 20% of all
infantsl and by far the commonest outcome is
spontaneous resolution without surgical interven­
tion?-5 In an observational population-based cohort
2
From: Departments of 1 Ophthalmology. and Epidemiology
and Public Health, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School,
Dundee, UK.
Correspondence to: Dr J. D. H. Young, Department of
Ophthalmology, Ninewells Hospital, Dundee DDl 9SY, UK.

Eye

(1996) 10, 485-491

study, 96% of the affected infants were free of
symptoms by their first birthday without treatment.1
Any treatment proposed must therefore be evalu­
ated against the baseline of this high rate of
spontaneous resolution.
On the same basis the natural history of the
condition during the second year of life must be
known to assess fully the results of any intervention,
in particular the standard treatment of probing and
syringing the nasolacrimal duct. However, published
information on the frequency of spontaneous resolu­
tion after 12 months of age is scarce,2,5 with that of
Nucci et al.6 being the most relevant. They reported
that in 23 of 29 patients over the age of 12 months the
condition resolved within 90 days of commencing
'medical' treatment with sac compression and topical
antibiotics.
The primary purpose of the present study was,
therefore, to establish the frequency of spontaneous
remission in presumed CNLDO persisting into the
second year of life: firstly to determine whether it
was common enough to be considered as a manage­
ment option as it is in the first year of life, and
secondly to provide a baseline against which any
interventional treatments can be assessed. The study
was extended to compare spontaneous resolution
with the current standard management used by the
authors (probing at about age 12 months). The study
design was for a prospective controlled randomised
trial, with probing at 12-14 months of age compared
with no treatment until 24 months. Surgeons at seven
centres collaborated in the trial.
METHODS

All infants presenting with presumed CNLDO
during the period of the study, and who were
approaching or just after their first birthday, were

© 1996 Royal College of Ophthalmologists

J. D. H. YOUNG ET AL.

486

assessed for trial entry. The clinical diagnosis of
presumed CNLDO was based on a history of
epiphora and/or discharge starting within 3 months
of birth, and an abnormal fluorescein dye disappear­
ance test (FDDT). The FDDT was performed in a
standard manner and recorded at 5 or 10 minutes?
When present the clinical signs of discharge, a thick
tear meniscus, mucocoele and skin excoriation
supported the diagnosis, and other conditions such
as epiblepharon and chlamydial conjunctivitis were
excluded.
Data on the severity of the symptoms were
collected at presentation. Parents were asked to
grade both the epiphora and discharge, as none,
intermittent or constant.
Study Entry
Patients were divided into four groups as follows.
Group I. All patients having a mucocoele, or who
had persistent conjunctival hyperaemia and dis­
charge except while on antibiotics, were assumed to
have a poorer prognosis for spontaneous remission
and delay in treatment was considered to be
unethical. They were excluded from randomisation,
placed in group 1, and probing advised.
Groups 2 and 3. Parents of those remaining children
presenting within the time limits and with no medical
contraindication were then given full information on
the nature and purpose of the study, including a
parents' information sheet approved by Tayside
Committee for Medical Ethics. If informed consent
was obtained the child was registered by telephone
with the study office and a trial number allocated
from random number tables (sets of 1-16). Children
with odd trial numbers were placed in group 2 and
probed between 12 and 14 months. Those with even
trial numbers were placed in group 3 and probing
delayed until 24 months in the hope of spontaneous
remission.
Group 4. All remaining children, including those
suitable for the trial, but for whom informed consent
was not given, were placed in group 4 and managed
according to each clinician's current practice.
Children with a history of previous lacrimal
procedures were excluded.
Data were collected prospectively in a defined
order on a printed trial form to facilitate standardisa­
tion of methods, and of the randomisation process.
Probing
Probing was carried out with the child under general
anaesthetic, and was performed and recorded using
an agreed standard protocol. Probing of the naso­
lacrimal duct was via the upper canaliculus but
patency of the lower canaliculus was also confirmed
with gentle probing to the sac. The probe wire sizes

used were also standardised between the different
centres, and patency of the system judged by the
identification of diluted fluorescein in the nose or
nasopharynx after syringing. The maximum probe
size used was 00 (diameter 0.73 mm approx.). In this
paper the term 'probing' is used for the whole
procedure, including confirmation of patency by
syringing fluorescein.
Follow-up
At each follow-up visit a standard set of data was
collected. Cure was judged on the basis of a complete
or near complete remission of symptoms and signs
and a normal FDDT. Because of the possibility that
spontaneous remission might occur some time after a
failed probing, cure from probing was defined as
resolution of signs and symptoms within 1 month of
the procedure. In practice most cures were identified
by parents within a week of the procedure. Three
infants were not brought back to clinic and only
telephone follow-up was possible.
Obstacles to Randomisation
Many infants suitable for the trial were not rando­
mised. At this age multiple illnesses in children and
their families means there are many missed appoint­
ments or delayed probings, and the time limits for
trial entry and probing were narrow. We also
observed that after parents had read the information
sheet and realised there were choices in management
many did not wish to agree to the loss of control
implicit in the randomisation. The selection of a full
12 months of treatment delay as one arm of the trial
may also have inhibited recruitment. The reasons
given for non-randomisation are listed in Table 1.
Study Population
A total of 101 completed patient data forms were
received but 6 were excluded because of incomplete
data or lost follow-up. There were therefore 95
patient records (111 affected eyes) available for
analysis. Of these, only 22 patients (26 eyes) were
randomised but a further 55 patients (63 eyes)
followed a management plan similar to that for the
randomised group. This larger non-randomised
group provides valid observational data in its own
right but is also reported to allow assessment of any
selection bias in the randomised groups. In the non­
randomised group the time limits for probing were
Table I.

Reasons for non-randomisation

Reason recorded

Patients

Medical decision
Parental decision
Outside time limits
Other reason
Not recorded

27
21
22
1
2

Total

73

MANAGEMENT OF CONGENITAL NASOLACRIMAL DUCT OBSTRUCTION

relaxed to include patients probed at 11-15 months
rather than 12-14 months as in the randomised
group.

in various groups. However, as there is a subjective
element in these classifications and the groups are of
different size, these results can only exclude any
gross discrepancies in severity between the groups.
The incidence of almost constant discharge in the
probed groups (36%) is greater than that in the
delayed treatment groups (26%), but the difference
is not statistically significant. If the group 1 patients
who were probed on medical advice and the
randomised patients are excluded, the incidence of
almost constant discharge is 26% (5 of 19) in the
probed group and 29% (10 of 34) in the delayed
treatment group. We also wished to establish
whether the severity at presentation could predict
the chance of cure by either probing or spontaneous
resolution. Table IV shows that no major association
between severity at presentation and cure was
demonstrated. However, there was a small group of
5 patients who had epiphora and an abnormal FDDT
but whose parents reported no discharge. All 5
showed spontaneous resolution and while the num­
bers are small the trend approaches significance
(p 0.063, chi-squared test for trend).
The outcomes in those patients whose treatment
failed are shown in Table V. It is of interest that in
both groups spontaneous resolution continued to
occur, with a further 5 eyes resolving after age 2
years.
The results for the group 1 patients are shown
separately in Table VI. These are the patients
excluded from randomisation on the assumption

RESULTS

In Table II overall results from the non-randomised
and randomised groups are presented in parallel to
enable comparison. In the randomised arm of the
study probing is statistically superior to spontaneous
resolution at 15 months, a difference still evident at
24 months but no longer statistically significant. This
pattern is also evident with the larger numbers in the
non-randomised groups, but the statistical compar­
ison between them must be interpreted with caution
in view of the potential for bias in case selection. If
the results of both studies are combined the overall
cure rate for probing at 11-15 months is 74%,
compared with 60% for spontaneous resolution
before age 2 years.
The rate at which spontaneous remission occurred
during the second year of life in both groups is shown
in Fig. 1. In the whole study 30 of the 50 patients
(60%), observed without treatment, had had a
resolution of their CNLDO before their second
birthday. We planned a randomised trial to exclude
the bias that might result from the parents of the
more severely affected children requesting probing.
Bias might also have occurred because of the
relatively small number of patients in the randomised
trial. These points are addressed in Table III, which
reports the prevalence of the most severely affected
Table II.

487

=

Summary of the results of both studies

Random/sed Controlled Study
26 Eyes (22 patients)
Group 2

Group 3

Probed at

No treatment
to 24 months

12-14 months

Prospective Observational Study
63 Eyes (55 patients)
Group 1

Group 4

Probed at

11-15 months

No treatment to
24 months

15 months

15 months 24 months

Combined Data
(89 Eyes)

Probed at

11-15 months

No treatment to
24 months

24 months

Cure

8

5

7

21

10

23

29

Fail

2

11

9

8

27

11

10

20

3 1%

43%

73%

2 7%

6 8%

7 4%

60%

Cure Rate 80%

At 15 months probing Is superior to no
treatment p = 0.04 (Vates x,2 ).
At 24 months there Is no statistically
significant difference between the groups.

At 15 months probing Is superior to no
treatment p = 0.0006 (Vates x,2).
At 24 months there is no statistically
significant difference between the groups.

30

At 24 months there Is no statistically
significant difference between
the groups.

In the non-randomlsed groups the statistical comparisons must be treated with ceution as some bias in case selection
cannot be excluded. The figures are reported to show the consistency with results of the randomlsed study. At 15
months there are three additional patients in the observational study - who were then probed before 24 months.

J. D. H. YOUNG ET AL.

488

50

40

Eyes Watering
30

No. of
eyes
20

10

o
12

13

14

15

16

18

17

19

20

21

22

23

24

(Months)
•
•

Spontaneous Resolution -

Observational Group

Spontaneous Resolution -

Randomised Group

Eyes Resolving

13·18 months
48% (24/50)

19·24 months
23% (6126)

The rate of spontaneous resolution in months 19 - 24 was only half that in
months 13 - 18 and this difference reaches borderline statistical significance.
p
Fig. 1.

=

0.06 Yates X2

Randomised and observational studies: spontaneous resolution.

that with severe symptoms the chances of sponta­
neous resolution would be less and delay in probing
therefore unjustified. In fact the numbers and cure
rate at 80% was exactly the same as that for the
randomised patients who were probed, and a further
2 patients showed spontaneous resolution before
they could be probed.
Finally some data on the probings in the whole
Table III.

study group are reported (111 eyes of 95 patients).
Of the 60 probings undertaken in this study 25 (42%)
were graded as easy with no detectable obstruction
to the probe. Of these, 7 cases failed to resolve after
the initial probing but 3 then resolved spontaneously
before any further treatment. In 20 (33%) there was
a detectable obstruction at the lower end of the
nasolacrimal duct (NLD), and in 6 (10%) the

The severity of symptoms
Random/sad

(1) Randomlsed v Non-Randomlsed

Non-random/.ed

23 (36%)

Constant

discharge

5 (19%)

Constant

Epiphora

15 (58%)

Treatment de/eyed

(2) Delay of treatment to 24 months
v Probing at 11 - 15 months

36

(57%)

Probed

Constant discharge

13 (26%)

15 (38%)

Constant Epiphora

26 (52%)

25

Parents graded the symptoms of watering and discharge as none, Intarmlttent or constant. The
number wHh the most severe gracle of each symptom Is shown and as a percentage of Hs group
In brackets. There Is no statistically signIIIcant dlfferenca between the groups

(X' _)

(64%)

MANAGEMENT OF CONGENITAL NASOLACRIMAL DUCT OBSTRUCTION
Table IV.

489

Does the severity of symptoms predict the result of treatment?

Probing at 11 - 15 months
�---

------------------------

-------

Discharge

Watering

Cure

Fail

Cure

Fall

o

Nil

Nil
Intermittent

9

3

Constant

19

6

Intermittent

18

4

Constant

10

6

Spontaneous resolution by 24 months
-------

Cure

Watering

-------

Discharge

Cure

Fall
o

Nil

Fail

5

o

Intermittent

13

10

Intermittent

19

13

Constant

16

10

Constant

6

7

Nil

There was no statistically significant association between severity of symptoms and the results of
treatment. All 5 patients with watarlng but no discharge in the delayed treatment group resolved
spontaneously. Despite the small numbers this is suggestive of trend eX' p = 0.063)

obstruction was at the upper end of the NLD. In the
remaining 9 eyes (15%) severe obstruction to the
probe was recorded; 5 of these cases were cured by
their initial probing. In 4 patients (5 eyes) excluded
from the randomised or observational studies, severe
punctal stenosis or occlusion was considered to
explain the epiphora. Their lacrimal passages were
otherwise normal and all were cured by punctal
dilation and probing. Bleeding from the punctum was
recorded in 12 (20%) of the 60 eyes probed; of these,
8 were cured by the procedure and 4 were not.
DISCUSSION

The first objective of this study was to determine
whether the spontaneous resolution of CNLDO is of
clinical significance in the second year of life. With 30
of the 50 patients (60%) observed without treatment
showing spontaneous resolution by their second
birthday this clearly is the case, and parents should
be invited to consider delayed treatment as one of
the options for management. The data are also very
Table V.

Outcome after failure of treatment

Random/sed

Non randomised

=

Table VI.

Outcoms After Failure of Spontaneous Resolution by 24 Months
Outcome

suggestive of a decrease in the frequency of
spontaneous remission after 18 months of age.
Although this difference only reaches borderline
statistical significance (p 0.06, Yates' chi-squared),
in the absence of alternative data we consider it
should be incorporated into the clinical management
plan for those children whose parents have elected to
defer probing. Should there still be no sign of
spontaneous resolution, the age of 18 months
appears to be an appropriate time to reconsider
probing.
We also observed spontaneous resolution in 7 eyes
in the third year of life. The knowledge that
spontaneous resolution may still occur after 2 years
of age may be relevant to the parents of children with
mild symptoms who would prefer to avoid interven­
tion if possible.
Our study has shown that spontaneous resolution
remains a common occurrence in the second year of
life and this information should be taken into account
when assessing the merits of the many treatments
that have been proposed for CNLDO. At all ages
Group 1 results
Non-random/sed· severe symptoms.
Mucocele or recurrent conjuncl/vitis with hyperaemia
13 patients (15 eyes)

Total

Spontaneous
resolution

Cure after probing
Fall after probing
Spontaneous
resolution after
probing

2

Lost to follow up

11

9

Total

Outcome After Failure o f Probina at 1 1 Outcome

Spontaneous resolution
Further procedure
Lost to follow up
Total

spontaneous
Reso/ution

Probed

4

11·15 months

16 & 17 months

Cure

8

2

Fall

2

o

20

15 Months

Comments

2

(14 & 16 months)

2, 3 & 17 months after probing
3 probing, 1 Intubation
After failure recorded

10

The cure rate for probing at 11 - 15 months Is exactly the same as that in the
randomised patients who were probed.

490

uncontrolled studies of any form of interventional
treatment will be likely to overestimate the cure rate.
For example, nasolacrimal duct intubation after
failed probing has never been evaluated against a
control group. The apparent improvement in the
success rate obtained by leaving the intubation in situ
for 7-12 months8.9 may result partly from masked
spontaneous remission. However, the present study
has illustrated the problems in obtaining control
groups in this condition and in some situations the
data we have presented may be useful as a guide
when analysing reports of interventional treatment.
There may also be occasions when intubation after
a failed probing is undertaken unnecessarily. If there
is failure of an apparently easy probing, with no
resistance to the probe and with patency to
fluorescein, then there may be no anatomical
obstruction for probing or intubation to cure.
We speculate that in some cases presumed
CNLDO may result from poor lacrimal pump
function, perhaps due to narrow lacrimal passages
in infancy. Three patients in this study showed late
spontaneous resolution, after probing graded as easy
had failed. In this category of patient we now advise
delay until 24 months of age in the hope of
spontaneous resolution, before considering intuba­
tion of such anatomically patent systems.
The second aim of the study was to reassess
probing by comparing its results with spontaneous
resolution. The numbers in the randomised study are
smaller than intended for the reasons already given.
Despite these small numbers some conclusions are
possible. At 15 months the cure rate for patients
probed at 12-14 months was 80% compared with
31% for no treatment, and this difference is
statistically significant - a pattern replicated in the
non-randomised group. This provides the first con­
firmation from a controlled study that probing at
12-14 months is an effective intervention compared
with the background rate of spontaneous remission.
In both randomised and non-randomised groups
probing still appears superior at 24 months, but the
increased number of cases with spontaneous resolu­
tion in the no-treatment groups means that the
difference is not statistically significant.
The apparent advantage of probing at 12-14
months does not mean that it is necessarily the
treatment of choice for all patients. Many parents
will be more concerned at the prospect of operative
intervention and an anaesthetic than the persistent
symptoms, and will prefer to delay treatment given a
reasonable chance that spontaneous resolution may
occur. For most individuals there is no absolute
medical indication for either treatment choice and
the parents' own views should be decisive.
To make an informed decision the parents need to
know the success rates for probing compared with

J. D. H. YOUNG ET AL.

the rate of spontaneous resolution as identified in
this study, and to realise that all interventions carry
an element of risk. For example, probing a naso­
lacrimal duct destined for spontaneous resolution
might be associated with local trauma inducing
canalicular or duct stenosis.lO In this study bleeding
from the punctum, which might signal such trauma,
occurred in 20% of all probings.
The parents will also wish to know whether delay
in treatment carries any risk. This has been suggested
as a possibility in the past, either by CNLDO
predisposing to severe infections or by chronic
infection inducing permanent stenosis of the lacrimal
passages.1l.l2 No serious infective complications
occurred in this study, or in our study on children
in the first year of life.1 However, a few cases of
orbital cellulitis considered secondary to lacrimal sac
infection are cited in the literature and the parents
should be advised of this.12.13
We consider that there is no valid evidence to
confirm the suggestions11.12 that delay in probing is
detrimental to the cure rate. Katowitz and Welsh12
found a drop in the cure rate for probing from 96%
at ages 6-13 months to 33% after 2 years, and on this
basis they advised probing prior to 13 months of age.
This analysis may require revision in view of the high
rate of spontaneous resolution we have identified,
which will generate an increased incidence of the
more severe obstructions in the later-probed groups.
In the present study 11 children were probed after
age 2 years with a cure rate of 54%. However, at 12
months of age they had been part of a group of 50
infants, 35 of whom eventually showed spontaneous
resolution, giving a total cure rate after the probings
of 82% (8% were lost to follow-up after 2 years).
In a birth cohort study 96% of children originally
affected by CNLDO had had spontaneous resolution
of the condition by 12 months of age.l Extrapolating
this figure on the basis of the frequency of
spontaneous resolution found in the present study,
less than 2% of ducts may remain obstructed by age
24 months. If this group could be identified earlier,
delay in their treatment could be avoided. Unfortu­
nately we were unable to demonstrate any major
correlation between cure rate and severity of
symptoms or signs, so there is at present no means
of predicting outcome on an individual basis. The
only trend that did emerge was for spontaneous
resolution in the small group of infants with
abnormal FDDT results but whose parents reported
only epiphora and not discharge. We suggest probing
should be delayed until 24 months for such patients.
In conclusion, we have emphasised the importance
of the natural history and parental choice in
determining the requirement and timing for any
intervention in CNLDO. Some previous studiesl-6,14
have suggested that the medical advice to parents

MANAGEMENT OF CONGENITAL NASOLACRIMAL DUCT OBSTRUCTION

should be to delay probing until after 12 months of
age. We consider the evidence from the present
study would support a policy of probing at about 12
months of age for those infants with severe signs and
symptoms of CNLDO. In less severe cases delay
until 18 months is appropriate, during which period
there is a 50% chance of spontaneous resolution. In
our view there is no objection to further delay if the
parents wish it and this should be specifically advised
in infants with epiphora but minimal or no discharge.
We thank the study secretary Mrs V. Brown.The work was
supported by a grant from the Speed-Pollock Trust.
Key words: Congenital nasolacrimal duct obstruction, Probing.
Natural history.

REFERENCES
1. MacEwen CJ, Young JDH. Epiphora during the first
year of life. Eye 1991;5:596-600.
2. Price HW. Dacryostenosis. J Pediatr 1947;30:302-5.
3. Paul TO. Medical management of congenital naso­
lacrimal duct obstruction. J Pediatr 1958;22:68-70.
4. Peterson RA, Robb RM. The course of congenital
obstruction of the naso-Iacrimal duct. J Pediatr
Ophthalmol Strabismus 1978;15:246-50.
5. Nelson LB, Calhoun JH, Menduke H. Medical

491

management of congenital nasolacrimal duct obstruc­
tion. Ophthalmology 1985;92:1187-90.

6. Nucci P, et at. Conservative management of nasolacri­
mal duct obstruction. J Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus
1989;26:39-43.
7. MacEwen CJ, Young JDH. The fluorescein disappear­
ance test: an evaluation of its use in infants. J Pediatr
Ophthalmol Strabismus 1991;28:302-5.
8. Katowitz lA, Welsh MG. Timing of silastic tubing
removal after intubation for congenital nasolacrimal
duct obstruction. Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg
1989;5:43-8.
9. AI-Hussain H, Nasr AM. Silastic intubation in con­
genital nasolacrimal duct obstruction. A study of 129
eyes. Ophthalmol Plast Reconstr Surg 1993;9:32-7.
10. Lyon DB, et at. Canalicular stenosis following probing
for congenital nasolacrimal duct obstruction. Ophthal­
mic Surg 1991;22:228-32.
11. Ffooks 00. Dacrocystitis in infancy. Br J Ophthalmol
1962;46:422-34.
12. Katowitz JA, Welsh MG. Timing of initial probing and
irrigation in congenital nasolacrimal duct obstruction.
Ophthalmology 1987;94:698-705.
13. Noda S, Hayasaka S, Setogawa T. Congenital nasola­
crimal duct obstruction in Japanese infants: its inci­
dence and treatment with massage. J Pediatr
Ophthalmol Strabismus 1991;28:20-2.
14. EI-Mansoury J, et al. Results of late probing for
congenital nasolacrimal duct obstruction. Ophthalmol­
ogy 1986;93:1052-4.