Providing Nutrition Supplements to Institutionalized Seniors with
Probable Alzheimer’s Disease Is Least Beneﬁcial to Those with
Low Body Weight Status
Karen W. H. Young, MSc,Ã w Carol E. Greenwood, PhD,Ã wz Robert van Reekum, MD,w§
and Malcolm A. Binns, MSc k

OBJECTIVES: To examine whether providing a midmorning nutrition supplement increases habitual energy intake in
seniors with probable Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and to investigate the effects of body weight status and cognitive and
behavioral function on the response to the intervention.
DESIGN: Randomized, crossover, nonblinded clinical trial.
SETTING: A fully accredited geriatric teaching facility afﬁliated with the University of Toronto’s Medical School
with a home for the aged.
PARTICIPANTS: <n>Thirty-four</n> institutionalized seniors
with probable AD who ate independently.
INTERVENTION: Nutrition supplements were provided
between breakfast and lunch for 21 consecutive days and
compared with 21 consecutive days of habitual intake.
MEASUREMENTS: Investigator-weighed food intake,
body weight, cognitive function (Severe Impairment Battery and Global Deterioration Scale), behavioral disturbances (Neuropsychiatric InventoryFNursing Home
Version), and behavioral function (London Psychogeriatric
Rating Scale).
RESULTS: Relative to habitual intake, group mean analyses showed increased 24-hour energy, protein, and carbohydrate intake during the supplement phase, but ﬁve of 31
subjects who ﬁnished all study phases completely compensated for the energy provided by the supplement by reducing lunch intake, and 24-hour energy intake was enhanced
in only 21 of 31 subjects. Compensation at lunch was more
From the ÃDepartment of Nutritional Sciences, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; and wKunin-Lunenfeld
Applied Research Unit, Departments of zFood and Nutrition Services and
§
Psychiatry, and k Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Center for Geriatric
Care, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
Research supported by a grant from the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (CIHR). Karen W. H. Young was the recipient of a
K. M. Hunter/CIHR Doctoral Research Award and an Ontario Graduate
Scholarship in Science and Technology. Nutrition supplement bars provided
by Stella Pharmaceutical Canada Inc., Quebec. This work was presented
at the Second International Academy of Nutrition and Aging Congress,
Albuquerque, New Mexico, July 2003.
Address correspondence to Karen Young, Baycrest Center for Geriatric Care,
KLARU Department, Room 728, 3560 Bathurst Street, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada M6A 2E1. E-mail: karen.young@utoronto.ca

JAGS 52:1305–1312, 2004
r 2004 by the American Geriatrics Society

likely in subjects with lower body mass indices, increased
aberrant motor behavior, poorer attention, and increased
mental disorganization/confusion.
CONCLUSION: Nutrition supplements were least likely
to enhance habitual energy intake in subjects who would
normally be targeted for nutrition interventionFthose with
low body weight status. Those likely to beneﬁt include
those with higher body mass indices, less aberrant motor
problems, less mental disorganization, and increased attention. J Am Geriatr Soc 52:1305–1312, 2004.
Key words: Alzheimer’s disease; neuropsychiatric inventory; cognitive impairment; dietary intake; appetite regulation

A

lthough there is an unacceptably high prevalence of
involuntary weight loss in the elderly in general,1
weight loss is more likely to occur in seniors with probable
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) than in healthy elderly2–5 and is
considered a clinical feature consistent with the diagnosis of
AD.6 Prevention of involuntary weight loss is important
because weight loss and low body weight status are predictors of morbidity,7 mortality,2,8 and poor quality of life.9
The origin(s) of weight loss in the population with AD has
yet to be deﬁnitively established, but a decline in food intake
may be a contributor.10 Nutritional supplements are often
prescribed, especially to nursing home residents, as an intervention for weight loss, despite the fact that further research is needed to establish their effectiveness.11
The integrity of appetite regulatory systems signaling
hunger and satiety will, in part, govern the ability of nutritional supplements to enhance daily food intake. To successfully increase food intake, compensation (a phenomenon whereby intake of habitual foods is reduced to adjust
or compensate for energy provided by the intervention/test
food) cannot occur. Although the lack of compensatory responses to additional foods would suggest dysfunctional
appetite regulatory signals, this could potentially be beneﬁcial to seniors at risk for undernutrition, if appropriately
exploited.

0002-8614/04/$15.00

1306

YOUNG ET AL.

Most,12–15 but not all,16 studies suggest that the elderly,
including those with AD,15 have an impaired ability to regulate food intake, and associate the provision of excess energy with reductions in habitual food intake, but not of
sufﬁcient magnitude to completely compensate for the energy contained in the intervention foods.12,15 Studies demonstrating enhanced energy and protein intake through the
provision of oral supplements for 15 days to hospitalized
critically ill elderly patients17 and weight gain in 12-week
supplementation studies in institutionalized demented seniors18,19 also suggest impaired compensatory responses.
However, studies suggesting that a simultaneous reduction in the habitual diets of institutionalized frail seniors
offsets high compliance in consumption counter these studies that support the potential success of nutritional supplements to enhance intake.20 Part of the problem may be the
lack of understanding of the appropriate provision of supplements,11 with a recent study suggesting that providing dietary supplements to seniors between meals rather than with
meals may be more effective in increasing energy intake.21
Features of disease progression are likely to inﬂuence
the integrity of appetite regulatory mechanisms in seniors
with AD. Not only are age-related physiological changes
that result in the failure to adequately regulate food intake,
the so-called anorexia of aging,22 likely to affect seniors
with AD, but atrophy in regions of the brain such as the
mesial temporal cortex23 is also likely to affect food intake,
and possible neurotransmitter abnormalities associated
with appetite regulation24 can also occur. Furthermore, behavioral25 and cognitive6 deterioration that accompany the
disease process are likely to negatively affect food intake.10
For example, studies on institutionalized seniors with AD
suggest that the ability to recognize appropriate appetite
signals may vary depending on time of day, level of behavioral difﬁculties of the individual, and body weight status.10,26
Based upon the need to expand current understanding
of appetite regulation and the effectiveness of nutrition
supplements in seniors with AD, the goals of this investigation were to determine whether providing a nutrition
supplement between breakfast and lunch inﬂuences habitual energy intake and to determine the effects of patient
characteristics such as body weight status, cognitive performance, behavioral disturbances, and behavioral function on intervention response.

METHODS
Subjects
Residents of the AD units of the Apotex Center at Baycrest
Center for Geriatric Care (an academic geriatric care facility associated with the Faculty of Medicine, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Canada) were eligible for selection. Inclusion criteria were diagnosis of probable AD made by a
qualiﬁed clinician (diagnosis of AD using standardized assessments by the family physician, geriatrician, or primary
care physician is required for admission to the AD units)
and the ability to self-feed or to require only minimal levels
of assistance (e.g., opening containers). Exclusion criteria
were diseases requiring nutritional intervention (e.g., type 1
diabetes mellitus), prescription of an energy-restricted diet
(e.g., for weight-maintenance purposes), swallowing difﬁculties requiring a texture-modiﬁed diet, and acute illness.

AUGUST 2004–VOL. 52, NO. 8

JAGS

These criteria were ascertained through chart reviews and
interviews with the residents’ primary healthcare providers
(primary care physicians, attending registered nurses, registered dietitians). Following protocol approval by the Baycrest ethics committee, informed consent was obtained
from the family or legal guardian.
Thirty-four of the identiﬁed eligible subjects participated in the study (Figure 1). Potential subjects were identiﬁed and actively recruited until the sample size was
reached. The same inclusion/exclusion criteria were applied
to all identiﬁed eligible subjects. Demographic variables for
those not enrolled were not collected. Lack of participation
of eligible subjects approached by study personnel was due
to the fact that the legal guardians were unable to provide
consent due to court restrictions (n 5 1), were not actively
involved in the life of the individual (n 5 1), or did not
perceive the study to be beneﬁcial to their family member
(n 5 3). Of these, 31 residents completed the baseline and
supplement phases (see Figure 1 for reasons for noncompletion of the supplement intervention). Consultations with
the attending physician or clinical nurse manager conﬁrmed
that all subjects were medically and weight stable (o10%
weight loss during the previous 6 months and o5% weight
loss during the previous month) 6 months before the start of
the study and at the time of enrollment. In addition to a
diagnosis of AD, one subject was diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease and a second with bipolar disorder. Subject
characteristics are summarized in Table 1.
Subjects consumed all meals in the main dining rooms
of the units they resided in. Groups of four to six study
participants consumed their meals in each of seven separate
dining rooms.

Study Design
The study was divided into four phases, each lasting 21 days
(Figure 1). In Phase 1, subjects consumed their usual diet
while baseline measures were obtained. In Phase 2, subjects
were randomly assigned, by unit, to the supplement intervention or the alternate dinner choices intervention.27 Random assignment of the interventions was conducted at the
level of the unit, or dining room, rather than at the level of
the individual to minimize disruptions to the dining room
and consequently the meal environment, by a random draw
from an opaque envelope, with three of seven units receiving the supplement intervention ﬁrst. Subjects resumed their
usual diet in Phase 3, which served as a washout period. In
Phase 4, subjects were assigned the nutrition intervention
that they did not receive in Phase 2. The alternate dinner
choices intervention did not include the provision of additional nutritional supplements to subjects, and in no instance were subjects receiving a combination of the two
interventions tested.
All foods served to the participants for meals, snacks,
and the supplement intervention were weighed before and
after consumption, during the entire length of the study, to
quantify the amounts consumed. Food consumption was
converted to nutrient intake using a software program, Dietary Food Management (DFM Systems Inc., Des Moines,
IA), which contains all facility recipes and calculates the
nutrient composition based on individual ingredients using
the Canadian Nutrient Database.28

JAGS

AUGUST 2004–VOL. 52, NO. 8

NUTRITION SUPPLEMENTS AND SENIORS WITH AD

1307

specifically to match as closely as possible the energy and
macronutrient content of the nutrient supplement bar and
juice. Research assistants provided and actively encouraged
consumption of the supplement, but they were passive during meals and only assessed intake achieved during all
phases. The amount of supplement and juice consumed on
each study day was measured and the within-individual
variability in supplement/juice consumption accounted for
in subsequent analyses.

Figure 1. Participant ﬂow diagram. P 5 phase.

Dietary Interventions
During the supplement intervention, subjects received daily
a nutrition supplement at 10 a.m., approximately 60 minutes after breakfast was completed. A previous study demonstrated that individuals with greater degrees of
behavioral difﬁculties consumed the greatest proportion
of food during the morning, were the most responsive to
foods provided during this time, and were less likely to eat
as the day progressed.10,26 Thus, to capitalize on the hours
of the day when these individuals are most likely to eat, the
supplement was provided in the morning, between breakfast and lunch. Other than providing the midmorning supplement, no changes to the existing meals (breakfast, lunch,
afternoon nourishment, dinner) were made. Most subjects
(n 5 19) were provided three-quarters of a nutrition supplement bar (Nutribar, Stella Pharmaceutical Canada Inc.,
Quebec, Canada) and juice (apple, orange, cranberry, or
prune), which provided 258 kcal from a mixture of protein
(17% of energy), fat (22% of energy), and carbohydrate
(61% of energy). Because of lactose intolerance, ﬁve subjects were given a soy protein bar (Genisoy, Genisoy Products Co., Fairﬁeld, CA), which was topped with a spread
consisting of margarine and icing sugar (to closely match
the macronutrient content of the nutrient supplement bar),
and a glass of juice (total 250 kcal, 17% protein, 22% fat,
61% carbohydrate). Six subjects were given a liquid supplement (Ensure, Abbott Laboratories Ltd, Quebec, Canada; 250 kcal, 15% protein, 24% fat, 61% carbohydrate)
because of a dislike of the sweetness of the supplement bars.
One subject received strawberry jam on white bread, hardboiled eggs, and ginger ale (258 kcal, 16% protein, 23%
fat, 60% carbohydrate) because of the subject’s refusal to
eat most other foods. The amounts of each were selected

Sample Size Calculations
Separate power calculations estimated the number of days
of food intake required per individual and the number of
subjects required. The study was powered (0.8 power;
a 5 0.05) to observe within-individual differences in energy
intake during the intervention relative to the baseline period
(intervention response). Using a report of mean, minimum,
and maximum 24-hour and meal-related variability in food
intake, measured in a comparable institutionalized group of
19 seniors with probable AD,10 21 days of intake data allowed for the detection of a 250 kcal difference in 24-hour
energy intake in approximately 75% of the subjects and
lunch energy differences of 150 kcal in approximately 80%
of the residents. Detecting smaller energy differences is unlikely to be clinically relevant or feasible in those with extremely high within-individual intake variability. To
explore the associations between intervention response
and subject characteristics with a group level correlation of
0.5 (a 5 0.05, b 5 0.20), 28 individuals were required. Assuming a loss of approximately 20% during the study, 34
subjects were recruited.
Cognitive and Behavioral Assessments
Cognitive abilities were assessed by administering the Severe Impairment Battery (SIB)29 and Global Deterioration
Scale (GDS).29 Lower scores on the SIB indicate greater
cognitive impairment, with total scores less than 63 indicating very severe impairment.29 The GDS is a 7-point rating instrument used for staging the magnitude of cognitive
impairment in aging and dementia, with higher scores indicating greater cognitive decline.30
Behavioral disturbances were assessed using the
Neuropsychiatric InventoryFNursing Home version (NPINH),31 with higher scores suggesting greater levels of behavioral disturbances. Behavioral function was assessed by
administering the London Psychogeriatric Rating Scale
(LPRS), with higher scores indicating greater disability.32,33
Trained research assistants, unfamiliar with the eating
patterns of the subjects, administered the SIB to the subjects; the primary caregiver completed the GDS and LPRS.
Although trained research assistants scored the NPI-NH,
the completion of these assessments was based upon longterm observations provided by the primary caregiver, who
had greater knowledge of the usual behavior of the subjects.
Although the caregivers could not be blinded to the study,
they were blinded to the research hypothesis. All assessments were conducted during the baseline phase, and the
SIB and NPI-NH were repeated during the last week of the
study, with the mean score used in the analyses. Because
these assessments were not conducted throughout the

1308

YOUNG ET AL.

AUGUST 2004–VOL. 52, NO. 8

JAGS

Table 1. Subject Characteristics
All Subjects
N 5 34a

Supplement
in Phase 4 n 5 18c
P-valued

Mean Æ Standard Deviation

Characteristic
Age at start of study
Body mass index, kg/m2
Global Deterioration Scale scoree
SIB total scoref
SIB attention subscaleg
NPI-NH total scoreh
NPI-NH aberrant motor behavior subscalei
LPRS total scorej
LPRS mental disorganization/confusion subscalek

Supplement in
Phase 2 n 5 13b

88.2 Æ 3.9
23.8 Æ 3.6
5.0 Æ 1.1
60.8 Æ 26.7
3.9 Æ 2.2
21.8 Æ 17.2
2.5 Æ 3.6
30.4 Æ 12.1
11.0 Æ 4.4

87.6 Æ 4.9
23.4 Æ 3.9
5.3 Æ 1.0
56.6 Æ 31.5
3.4 Æ 2.6
20.8 Æ 13.8
1.8 Æ 2.8
30.7 Æ 12.1
11.7 Æ 4.6

88.4 Æ 3.5
24.1 Æ 3.7
4.7 Æ 1.2
62.8 Æ 24.1
4.2 Æ 1.9
21.7 Æ 17.7
2.6 Æ 3.9
30.0 Æ 13.5
10.5 Æ 4.6

.613
.630
.173
.551
.349
.883
.541
.884
.483

a

27 women.
11 women.
15 women.
d
Comparisons made between subjects receiving the supplement during Phases 2 and 4.
e
Possible score ranges from 1 to 7.
f
Severe Impairment Battery (SIB) scores are a mean of two observations per subject, with the exception of two subjects who became ill during the study. For the SIB and
subsequent test batteries, only subscales that showed significant associations with outcome measures are included. Total possible score ranges from 0 to 100.
g
Possible score ranges from 0 to 6.
h
Neuropsychiatric InventoryFNursing Home version (NPI-NH) scores are a mean of two observations per subject, with the exception of two subjects who became ill
during the study. Total possible score ranges from 0 to 120.
i
Possible score ranges from 0 to 12.
j
London Psychogeriatric Rating Scale (LPRS) total possible score ranges from 0 to 72.
k
Possible score ranges from 0 to 26.
b
c

course of the study, they were used as predictors of outcome
and not as outcome measures.

Weight
Body weight was measured to the closest tenth of a kg using
a seated electronic scale (Alenti, Arjo Inc., Roselle, IL) on
Day 1 of the study and on the last day of every phase. Body
weight status was expressed as body mass index (BMI),
calculated as weight in kg divided by the square of the subject’s adult height in m. Body weight relative to the subject’s
adult height was calculated because many residents demonstrated curvature of the spine due to osteoarthritis. Calculating BMI based upon the subject’s current height, as
opposed to adult height, would have falsely raised this value. The subject’s adult height was obtained from the subject’s history recorded in the chart.
Statistical Analysis
All analyses were performed using SAS software (SAS for
Windows, v8.02, SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC). To examine whether intake differed during the supplement phase
versus the baseline phase, meal-related and 24-hour intake
from these phases were compared using paired t tests, at the
group level and within each individual. At the group level,
intention-to-treat analyses were also conducted to account
for the three recruited individuals who did not complete the
supplement intervention. For the two subjects who became
ill and were transferred to the hospital before initiating the
intervention, the last observation carried forward approach34 was used, whereas intake data collected during
the baseline and intervention periods for the subject who
refused the supplement intervention were used.

Intervention response was examined for each individual by calculating the percentage of compensation for the
supplement at the subsequent meal (lunch). Twenty-one
compensation values were calculated for each subject (representing each of the intervention days) using the following
formula:
0
1
mean lunch intake during baseline ðkcalÞÀ
B lunch intake after supplement ðkcalÞ C
@
A Â 100
supplement size ðkcalÞ
A value of 100% indicates complete compensation,
suggesting that lunch intake is reduced by the same amount
of energy consumed for the supplement, a value greater
than 100% indicates overcompensation (undereating), and
a value less than 100% indicates undercompensation
(overeating). Mean compensation values for each subject
were used in subsequent analyses investigating predictors of
intervention response.
To determine the association between body weight status and intervention response, mean compensation for the
supplement was regressed against BMI, using the reciprocal of the variance of mean compensation as a weighting
variable.
To explore the associations between intervention response, cognitive ability, and behavioral function, mean
compensation was regressed against the total scores for the
SIB, GDS, and LPRS. The coefﬁcient of determination (r2)
selection procedure and stepwise regression were conducted
to explore associations between mean compensation and
the subscales of the SIB and LPRS.
Given that many behavioral disturbances, as assessed
using the NPI-NH, are likely to be grouped into a few syndromes via factor analysis,35,36 mean compensation was

JAGS

AUGUST 2004–VOL. 52, NO. 8

regressed against composite scores derived from previously
published NPI factor loadings from a similar, but more robust, larger sample (n 5 162) than the current group.35
Multiple regression was conducted to investigate associations between mean compensation and the composite factor
scores, using the reciprocal of the variance of mean compensation as a weighting variable, which allowed an exploration of the effect of behavioral problems on the
response to the intervention. The subscales with loadings
greater than the cutoff from the factors that were signiﬁcantly associated with compensation were further investigated in a model that included only that subscale but
adjusted for the other factors.

RESULTS
Description of Subjects
There was no significant difference between participants
who received the supplement in Phase 2 and those who
received it in Phase 4 with respect to the demographic variables collected and the mean scores on the cognitive and
behavioral assessments that were conducted (Table 1). At
the group level, based upon the criteria for scoring the GDS,
the group had moderate to severe cognitive decline, whereas
the mean total score on the SIB would classify the group as
severely impaired.29,30 Of the 34 subjects, ﬁve had BMIs
below 20 kg/m2, and 15 had BMIs between 20 and 24 kg/
m2. The mean age, BMI, degree of cognitive impairment,
and level of behavioral difﬁculties of the subjects that received the supplement intervention in Phase 2 were not different from those of the subjects who received it in Phase 4
(Table 1).
Analyses at the Level of the Group
Group mean analyses on energy and macronutrient intake
during the midmorning supplement phase versus the baseline period suggest that, overall, complete compensation for
the supplement does not occur (Figure 2). Although there
was a small but significant reduction in lunch energy intake
(mean Æ standard deviation) after the supplement was consumed (decreased by 56.0 Æ 81.3 kcal, P 5.0006), breakfast energy intake was greater (increased by 26.6 Æ 67.7
kcal, P 5.04), whereas afternoon nourishment and dinner
intakes were unchanged. Together with a mean consumption of 201 Æ 78 kcal for the midmorning supplement (representing a mean of 78.8 Æ 22.0% consumption of the
supplements provided), this resulted in an overall increase
in 24-hour energy consumption (154.5 Æ 184.5, Po.001).
Furthermore, 24-hour protein intake, which is likely inadequate in this population,10 increased when the supplement
was consumed (61.5 Æ 18.8 g vs 54.7 Æ 17.4 g during baseline, Po.001), as did carbohydrate intake (252.1 Æ 57.0 g
vs 224.7 Æ 52.1 g during baseline, Po.001), whereas fat
intake was unchanged (55.5 Æ 18.1 g vs 53.3 Æ 16.7 g during baseline, P 5.082).
For participants who received the supplement intervention in Phase 4, mean 24-hour energy intake during
Phase 3 (1,517.1 Æ 382.9 kcal) and mean 24-hour baseline
intake during Phase 1 (1,512.4 Æ 340.1 kcal) were not different (P 5.373), suggesting that intake was at baseline

NUTRITION SUPPLEMENTS AND SENIORS WITH AD

1309

levels for all participants at the start of the supplement intervention.
Intention-to-treat analysis showed that all observed
differences between baseline and intervention intake remained significant with the inclusion of the three subjects
who did not complete the supplement intervention, including increased 24-hour energy (136.1 Æ 187.0 kcal;
Po.001), protein (5.8 Æ 7.3; Po.001), and carbohydrate
(23.9 Æ 29.7; Po.001) intake, whereas 24-hour fat intake
remained unchanged (P 5.071).

Analyses at the Level of the Individual
Although group analysis suggested that subjects did not
completely compensate for the supplement energy consumed by reducing lunch intake, the study was designed to
examine intervention response at the level of the individual.
There was no significant difference (a 5 0.05) in midday
energy intake (midday 5 nutrition supplement1lunch) for
ﬁve of the 31 subjects who completed the intervention,
suggesting that some subjects completely compensated for
the additional energy from the supplement by reducing
lunch intake. At the 24-hour level, energy intakes were enhanced in 21 of 31 subjects. Mean compensation values of
the subjects that received the supplement in Phase 2
(25.8 Æ 34.8) were not different from those of the subjects
in Phase 4 (27.6 Æ 48.2) (P 5.911).
Body Weight Status
During the supplement intervention phase, subjects gained,
on average, 0.97 Æ 0.97 kg (Po.001). With the inclusion of
the three subjects who did not complete the supplement
intervention, the weight gained remained significant
(0.93 Æ 0.96, Po.001). Although weight gain was different depending on the phase that the intervention was received (P 5.044), subjects receiving the intervention in
either phase gained weight (Phase 2 supplement: 1.38 Æ
1.0 kg, P 5.0003; Phase 4 supplement: 0.67 Æ 0.85 kg,
P 5.004).
BMI was a significant predictor of compensation (Figure 3), with the direction of the association suggesting that
the target group for intervention, those with the lowest
body weight status, were most likely to compensate for the
supplement by reducing lunch intake. Consistent with this
association, 24-hour energy intake was more likely to be
enhanced in those with higher BMIs (b-value 5 21.2,
P 5.004). Specifically, three of ﬁve individuals who completed the intervention with BMIs below 20 kg/m2, and 12
of 14 individuals with BMIs between 20 and 24 kg/m2 (low
normal) enhanced their midday intakes. Nevertheless, this
resulted in only two of ﬁve individuals with BMIs below
20 kg/m2, and nine of 14 individuals with BMIs between 20
and 24 kg/m2 showing an increase at the 24-hour level. To
determine whether changes in body weight before the onset
of the supplement intervention had an inﬂuence on the association between compensation and BMI, the difference in
body weight measured on the ﬁrst day of the supplement
intervention and body weight during the baseline phase was
included in the model. It was found that a change in body
weight before the onset of the supplement intervention did
not have an effect (P 5.831).

1310

YOUNG ET AL.

AUGUST 2004–VOL. 52, NO. 8

2250

*

Baseline Phase
2000

Supplement Phase

Energy (kcal)

1750
1500
1250
1000
750

*

*

500

*

250
0
Breakfas t

Lunch
Dinner
Nutrition
Nourishment
Supplement

24 Hour

Meal

Figure 2. Group-level analyses show that the addition of a midmorning nutrition supplement resulted in a small decline in
lunch intake but no difference in afternoon nourishment or dinner intake. Overall 24-hour intake increased, suggesting undercompensation for the additional energy consumed. Results
presented as mean Æ standard deviation of the 31 subjects who
completed the trial. ÃSignificantly different from the baseline
phase; Po.05.

Exploratory Associations
Using composite scores derived from previously published
NPI factor loadings,35 it was found that the association
between compensation and the factor representing frontal
behavior was borderline significant (P 5.055, b-value 5 19.9). The directions of the loadings of this factor’s
dominant subscales suggest decreased anxiety but increased
disinhibition, euphoria/elation, apathy, and aberrant motor
behavior in those likely to compensate for the supplement

Mean % Compensation

150

100

50

0

-50

(r2=0.26, p=0.004)
14

16

18

20

22

24

26

28

30

32

34

BMI (kg/m2)

Figure 3. Subjects with lower body mass indices were more
likely to compensate for the supplement by reducing lunch intake and therefore not likely to enhance intake with the intervention. Weighted regressed line superimposed on unweighted
data points. r2 5 coefﬁcient of determination. BMI 5 body mass
index.

JAGS

by reducing lunch intake. Further analyses of these subscales suggest that those with increased aberrant motor
problems were likely to show increased compensation
(P 5.011, b-value 5 5.57).
The relationship between total SIB score and compensation was borderline significant (P 5.086, b-value 5
À 0.45). Relative to the other subscales of the SIB, attention
was the best predictor of compensation for the supplement,
with increased compensation occurring in those who
exhibited poor attention (P 5.007, b-value 5 À 9.38). Comparable with the total SIB score, the GDS also demonstrated
a borderline significant association with compensation
(P 5.073, b-value 5 9.51), suggesting higher compensation
due to lower lunch intake in those with greater cognitive
impairment.
The association between the total LPRS score and compensation was borderline significant (P 5.084, b-value 5
8.5). Further analyses showed that, relative to the other
subscales of this assessment, mental disorganization/confusion was the best predictor of compensation. Those exhibiting higher mental disorganization/confusion were more
likely to show increased compensation (P 5.004, b-value 5 4.77).

DISCUSSION
This study addressed whether the provision of a nutrient
supplement, as a midmorning snack, was an efﬁcacious
means of enhancing energy intake in institutionalized seniors with probable AD and was the ﬁrst to identify characteristics of seniors with AD that are predictive of
intervention response. Although group-level analyses
showed that intake and body weight were enhanced during the intervention, suggesting that the supplement was an
effective intervention, intervention response varied greatly
at the level of the individual and was highly associated with
body weight status, with greater resilience to the intervention in those with low BMIs. Furthermore, exploratory
analyses indicated that behavioral and cognitive disturbances were predictors of intervention response, with higher intake as a result of the supplement intervention more
likely to occur in individuals demonstrating low aberrant
motor problems and low cognitive impairment. This suggests that, although providing a midmorning nutritional
supplement to seniors with probable AD would not be a
globally efﬁcacious intervention, characteristics of the individual have been identiﬁed that are predictive of intervention response.
Several investigations have suggested that the ability to
regulate energy intake declines with advancing age12–15 and
is completely absent in those with dementia,15 although not
all are in agreement.16 Consistent with studies suggesting
impaired energy intake regulation, this study’s midmorning
supplement resulted in an overall improvement in 24-hour
intake and an increase in mean body weight at the group
level, although not all individuals increased their intake,
thus demonstrating that classifying the entire group as
lacking the ability to compensate for the additional supplement energy provided is inappropriate. Consistent with
observations in younger adults,37,38 the precision of appetite compensatory mechanisms was highly associated with
body weight status, such that those with lower BMIs were

JAGS

AUGUST 2004–VOL. 52, NO. 8

more likely to show increased compensation due to reduced
lunch intake. One interpretation of these results is that associations between BMI and compensation persist with aging, even in the face of neurodegenerative disorders such as
AD. Alternatively, other factors, such as behavioral problems or cognitive impairment, may interfere with or impair
appetite, leading to low BMI and intervention responses.
Although subjects with low BMI showed less beneﬁt
from the supplement than those with higher body weight
status, intake was enhanced above habitual levels, albeit to
a lesser degree, in many subjects with low and low-normal
BMI, suggesting that there is a subset of patients with low
body weight that is responsive to the supplement. Consequently, exploratory analyses were conducted to identify
subject characteristics predictive of positive intervention
response, as a ﬁrst step to enabling the identiﬁcation of
patients with low body weight that are likely to beneﬁt from
the supplement. However, larger-scale studies are required
to conﬁrm these associations.
Direct (SIB) and surrogate (GDS, LPRS) measures of
cognitive function all supported the observation that higher
cognitively functioning subjects were more likely to increase their energy intake because of decreased compensation for the snack. This could suggest that seniors who
maintain the ability to impose cognitive control over eating39 may be less reliant on physiological cues for appetite
regulation37,38 and consequently more responsive to interventions aimed at increasing intake above habitual levels.
This is consistent with dietary restraint models developed in
younger, healthier adult populations, which suggest that
distorted patterns of eating, including a decreased ability to
compensate for excess energy consumption, are more
apparent in those prone to gaining weight. In AD, physiological regulation of food intake deteriorates, in part, because of neurological and neurochemical changes.23,24
Thus, inappropriate eating patterns that occur with AD
progression10,40 may result from disturbed appetite signals
and loss of cognitive control over eating, placing those
with AD at increased risk of inadequate energy and nutrient
intake.
The intervention did not increase energy intake in some
subjects, many of whom were clustered at the lower end of
the BMI range. This would suggest that studies sampling
from low body weight or frail populations of seniors with
AD may be less likely to demonstrate beneﬁts associated
with supplement use than studies sampling a broader population, including individuals with higher body weight, as
this study did. Furthermore, because supplements are resource intensive, from labor and cost perspectives, and are
often not successfully administered within the long-term
care environment,11 this study highlights the possibility that
identiﬁcation of subject characteristics associated with intervention success can ultimately be reﬁned and used as a
means of directing resources to those most likely to beneﬁt.
Although the extensive data collection allowed for
good estimates of intervention response within each individual, this study was not designed to examine the longerterm response to the intervention. Although these results
show mean increases in energy intake and body weight over
a 3-week period, the sustainability of such increases over
longer periods would have to be examined elsewhere. Furthermore, because physiological adjustments in food intake

NUTRITION SUPPLEMENTS AND SENIORS WITH AD

1311

over time to prevent weight gain may occur, studies in this
population investigating compensatory responses over the
long term are necessary. Related to these issues is whether
enhanced intake would continue to support increases in
body weight or maintain body weight at a new, increased
level.
Further investigations on whether the approaches examined in this study would be feasible in day-to-day practice are needed. The fact that study personnel not only
served but also actively encouraged consumption of the
supplement likely contributed to the high compliance of
supplement consumption (78.8 Æ 22.0%) observed.
Whether the resources (facility staff and time) are available to integrate this activity into usual care of the residents is
not known. Furthermore, different forms of supplements
were used to accommodate dietary restrictions (e.g., lactose-free supplement bars) and personal likes and dislikes
(e.g., liquid supplements for those rejecting the bar) of study
participants, although once selected, the same supplement
was provided to each subject throughout the 21-day study
period. For such an intervention to be effective within a
clinical setting, the availability of a wide selection of supplements to accommodate varying needs and the identiﬁcation and continuous provision of the supplement most
suitable for the residents are necessary.
To eliminate several potential confounding factors, a
relatively homogeneous group of subjects was intentionally
selected to assess responses to nutritional supplements.
That is, those who did not have AD, required the assistance
of a feeder, and had swallowing problems, for example,
were excluded. Consequently it is not known whether the
results would extend to other populations, including those
more progressed in disease status (those likely requiring
feeding assistance or texture-modiﬁed foods) or to institutionalized seniors without dementia. Nevertheless, the results suggesting that cognitive status and behavioral
problems may affect appetite responses imply that these
factors would need to be considered when extending these
ﬁndings to broader populations of institutionalized seniors.
Furthermore, other factors may affect food intake, including length of stay at the facility. Although the negative association between body weight and duration of hospital
stay in demented patients4 may be primarily indicative of
more-advanced disease status, which was accounted for in
this study, other factors not accounted for may also be
contributors to disturbed intake and consequently may also
affect intervention response.
In summary, institutionalized seniors with probable
AD who had low body weight status tended to compensate
for the additional supplement energy consumed by reducing
lunch intake. Although compensation for additional foods
consumed is desirable in a younger, healthy population to
prevent weight gain, it is not a desirable outcome for interventions intended to enhance energy intake. Furthermore, exploratory analyses suggest that specific behavioral
problems, such as aberrant motor behavior, and degree of
cognitive impairment were associated with intervention response, which may aid in predicting whether a dietary intervention may be successful in a clinical setting. This study
also demonstrates the importance of idiographic research
methods. That is, seniors with AD were heterogeneous in
their response to the nutrition supplement, and concluding

1312

YOUNG ET AL.

that this population lacked the ability to compensate for the
additional calories and therefore would globally beneﬁt
from this intervention, based on group-level analysis, would
have been incorrect.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge Yassamin Gharai, Mae
Chan, Rayonne Chavannes, Carolyn Tam, Jody Wong,
Vincent Valencia, Barbara Wendland, Cynthia Pazmino,
Catherine Yo, Rosa Park, Thevaki Pararajasingam, Azadeh
Emam, Flavia Fayet, Afrinda Lord, Razzan Alagraa, Jonathan Stern, Michelle Waithe, Neneeta Sandu, and Joanne
Grove for their assistance in data collection; the Baycrest
staff for their support; and the volunteers who participated
in this study.
REFERENCES
1. Payette H, Gray-Donald K, Cyr R et al. Predictors of dietary intake in a functionally dependent elderly population in the community. Am J Public Health
1995;85:677–683.
2. White H, Pieper C, Schmader K. The association of weight change in Alzheimer’s disease with severity of disease and mortality: A longitudinal
analysis. J Am Geriatr Soc 1998;46:1223–1227.
3. Cronin-Stubbs D, Beckett LA, Scherr PA et al. Weight loss in people with
Alzheimer’s disease: A prospective population based analysis. BMJ 1997;
314:178–179.
4. Burns A, Marsh A, Bender DA. Dietary intake and clinical, anthropometric
and biochemical indices of malnutrition in elderly demented patients and nondemented subjects. Psychol Med 1989;19:383–391.
5. Singh S, Mulley GP, Losowsky MS. Why are Alzheimer patients thin? Age
Ageing 1988;17:21–28.
6. McKhann G, Drachman D, Folstein M et al. Clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer’s
disease. Report of the NINCDS-ADRDA Work Group under the auspices of
Department of Health and Human Services Task Force on Alzheimer’s Disease.
Neurology 1984;34:939–944.
7. MacIntosh C, Morley JE, Chapman IM. The anorexia of aging. Nutrition
2000;19:983–995.
8. Nielsen H, Lolk A, Pedersen I et al. The accuracy of early diagnosis and
predictors of death in Alzheimer’s disease and vascular dementiaFa follow-up
study. Acta Psych Scand 1991;84:277–282.
9. Crogan NL, Pasvogel A. The inﬂuence of protein-calorie malnutrition on
quality of life in nursing homes. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2003;
58A:B159–B164.
10. Young KW, Greenwood CE. Shift in diurnal feeding patterns in nursing home
residents with Alzheimer’s disease. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2001;56A:
M700–M706.
11. Kayser-Jones J, Schell ES, Porter C et al. A prospective study of the use of liquid
oral dietary supplements in nursing homes. J Am Geriatr Soc 1998;46:1378–
1386.
12. Rolls BJ, Dimeo KA, Shide DJ. Age-related impairments in the regulation of
food intake. Am J Clin Nutr 1995;62:923–931.
13. Roberts SB, Fuss P, Heyman MB et al. Control of food intake in older men.
JAMA 1994;272:1601–1606.
14. Moriguti JC, Das SK, Saltzman E et al. Effects of a 6-week hypocaloric diet on
changes in body composition, hunger, and subsequent weight regain in healthy
young and older adults. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2000;55A:B580–B587.
15. Keene J, Hope T, Rogers PJ et al. An investigation of satiety in ageing, dementia, and hyperphagia. Int J Eat Disord 1998;23:409–418.
16. Zandstra EH, Mathey MF, Graaf C et al. Short-term regulation of food intake
in children, young adults and the elderly. Eur J Clin Nutr 2000;54:239–246.

AUGUST 2004–VOL. 52, NO. 8

JAGS

17. Bourdel-Marchasson I, Barateau M, Rondeau V et al. A multi-center trial of
the effects of oral nutritional supplementation in critically ill older inpatients.
GAGE Group. Groupe Aquitain Geriatrique d’Evaluation. Nutrition 2000;
16:1–5.
18. Wouters-Wesseling W, Wouters AE, Kleijer CN et al. Study of the effect of a
liquid nutrition supplement on the nutritional status of psycho-geriatric nursing home patients. Eur J Clin Nutr 2002;56:245–251.
19. Carver AD, Dobson AM. Effects of dietary supplementation of elderly
demented hospital residents. J Hum Nutr Diet 1995;8:389–394.
20. Fiatarone Singh MA, Bernstein MA, Ryan AD et al. The effect of oral
nutritional supplements on habitual dietary quality and quantity in frail elders.
J Nutr Health Aging 2000;4:5–12.
21. Wilson MM, Purushothaman R, Morley JE. Effect of liquid dietary supplements on energy intake in the elderly. Am J Clin Nutr 2002;75:944–947.
22. Morley JE. Anorexia of aging: Physiologic and pathologic. Am J Clin Nutr
1997;66:760–773.
23. Grundman M, Corey-Bloom J, Jernigan T et al. Low body weight in
Alzheimer’s disease is associated with mesial temporal cortex atrophy. Neurology 1996;46:1585–1591.
24. Morley JE, Silver AJ. Anorexia in the elderly. Neurobiol Aging 1988;9:9–16.
25. Reisberg B, Borenstein J, Salob SP et al. Behavioral symptoms in Alzheimer’s
disease: Phenomenology and treatment. J Clin Psychiatry 1987;48:9–15.
26. Young KW, Binns MA, Greenwood CE. Meal delivery practices do not meet
needs of Alzheimer patients with increased cognitive and behavioral difﬁculties in a long-term care facility. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2001;56A:
M656–M661.
27. Young KWH, Greenwood CE, van Reekum R, Binns MA. A randomized
crossover trial of high carbohydrate foods in nursing home residents with
Alzheimer’s disease: Associations between intervention response, body mass
index, and behavioural and cognitive function. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci
in press 2004.
28. Department of National Health and Welfare. Canadian Nutrient File. Ottawa, Ontario, Canada: Health Services and Promotion Branch and Health
Protection Branch, 1991.
29. Panisset M, Roudier M, Saxton J et al. Severe impairment battery. A neuropsychological test for severely demented patients. Arch Neurol 1994;51:
41–45.
30. Reisberg B, Ferris SH, de Leon MJ et al. Global Deterioration Scale (GDS).
Psychopharm Bull 1988;24:661–663.
31. Wood S, Cummings JL, Hsu MA et al. The use of the neuropsychiatric
inventory in nursing home residents. Characterization and measurement.
Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2000;8:75–83.
32. Hersch EL, Kral VA, Palmer RB. Clinical value of the London Psychogeriatric
Rating Scale. J Am Geriatr Soc 1978;26:348–354.
33. Reid DW, Tierney MC, Zorzitto ML et al. On the clinical value of the London
Psychogeriatric Rating Scale. J Am Geriatr Soc 1991;39:368–371.
34. Streiner DL. The case of the missing data: Methods of dealing with dropouts
and other research vagaries. Can J Psychiatry 2002;47:68–75.
35. Frisoni G, Rozzini L, Gozzetti A et al. Behavioural syndromes in Alzheimer’s
disease. Description and correlates. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 1999;
10:130–138.
36. Fuh JL, Liu CK, Mega MS et al. Behavioural disorders and caregivers’ reaction
in Taiwanese patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Int Psychogeriatr 2001;
13:121–128.
37. Rolls B, Kim-Harris S, Fischman M et al. Satiety after preloads with different
amounts of fat and carbohydrate. Implications for Obesity. Am J Clin Nutr
1994;60:476–487.
38. Speechly DP, Buffenstein R. Appetite dysfunction in obese males: Evidence for
role of hyperinsulinaemia in passive overconsumption with a high fat diet. Eur
J Clin Nutr 2000;54:225–233.
39. Blundell JE, Gillett A. Control of food intake in the obese. Obesity Res
2001;9:263S–270S.
40. Greenwood CE, Tam C, Chan M et al. Behavioural disturbances, not cognitive
deterioration, associates with altered food selection in seniors with Alzheimer’s
disease. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci in press.