1. Random sequence generation

	Random sequence generation/allocation concealment (selection bias)
	Randomised?
	Random sequence generation (selection bias)
	Random sequence generation
	Adequate sequence generation?

2. Allocation concealment
	
	Adequate sequence generation
	Adequate allocation generation?
	Allocation concealment?
	Allocation concealment
	Allocation concealment (selection bias)

3. Blinding of participants and personnel

	Blinding
	Blinding of participants/carers?
	Blinding? (Participant and investigator)
	Adequate blinding of participants?
	Blinding of providers?
	Blinding (patient assessed)?
	Participants blinded?
	Blinding of physicians?
	Blinding of patients described?
	Blinding of participants and carers?
	Blinding?
	Interventions reported as indistinguishable?
	Blinding of patients?
	Blinding of participants and personnel (performance bias)
	Participant blinded?
	Personnel involved in the trial blinded?
	Blinding (Physician assessed)?
	Blinding of participants (performance bias)
	Blinding of the patients?
	Blinding during pre-, peri- and postoperative care?
	Blinding (performance bias and detection bias)
	Blinding of the providers?

4. Blinding of outcome assessment 

	Blinded data collection?
	Blinding? (Outcome assessors)
	Blinding of outcome assessment (detection bias) (functional outcomes, pain, clinical outcomes, complications)
	Blinding of outcome assessment
	Blinding of outcome assessment?
	Blinding of data analysts?
	Blinded data-analyses?
	Blinding of the data collectors?
	Outcome assessor blinded?
	Blinding of assessment of objective outcomes
	Blinding of the data analysis?
	Blinding of data collectors?
	Blinding (Outcome assessor assessed)?
	Adequate blinding of assessors?
	Blinding of outcome assessors?
	Blinding of the outcome data collectors?
	Blind outcome assessment
	Blinding of outcome assessment (detection bias)
	Blinding of the outcome adjudicators?
	Blinding of data analysis?
	Blinding of outcome assessment (detection bias) (Process variables)
	Blinding of outcome assessor
	Outcome assessors blinded?
	Outcome assessment with objective criteria or blinding
	Blinding of outcome adjudicators?
	Blinded adjudification of endpoints?
	Risk of bias in recall of falls
	Adequate blinding of outcome assessors?

5. Incomplete outcome data

	Incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
	Follow-up
	Follow-up of patients?
	Intention to treatment analysis?
	Follow up?
	Intention-to-treat analysis?
	Intention to treat analyses
	Incomplete outcome data addressed?
	Drop Outs?
	Incomplete outcome data
	Incomplete outcome data? (Caries efficacy outcomes)
	Incomplete outcome data addressed
	Adequate reporting of drop-outs?
	Incomplete outcome data addressed (use of intention-to-treat (ITT) analysis)
	Intention-to-treat analysis
	Incomplete outcome data addressed? (Clinical efficacy outcomes)
	Incomplete data addressed?
	Intention-to-treat analysis and loss to follow up
	Intention to treat analysis?

6. Selective reporting

	Selective reporting (reporting bias)
	Selective outcome data
	Free of selective reporting?

7. Other sources of bias

	7a - General

		Other sources of potential bias
		Other bias
		Free of other biases?
		Free of other bias?

	7b - Similarity of groups at baseline

		Free of other bias? Baseline comparability
		Baseline imbalance? (were groups balanced at baseline)
		No major imbalances in baseline characteristics?
		Similarity of baseline characteristics?
		Baseline (provider) characteristics similar
		Other bias: Comparability of cohorts
		Baseline assessment?
		Baseline characteristics balanced?
		Baseline characteristics similar?
		Baseline characteristics similar for intervention group and control?
		Similar point in disease progression
		Baseline data?
		Similarity at baseline characteristics?
		Baseline outcomes similar?
		Free of other bias? Comparability of the groups
		Baseline characteristics?
		Baseline Characteristics/Cross over assessment?
		Representative sample
		Balance in baseline characteristics
		Baseline (patient) characteristics similar
		Comparability at Baseline

	7c - Explicitly stated inclusion criteria

		Explicit inclusion/exclusion criteria?
		Inclusion and exclusion criteria?
		Were both inclusion and exclusion criteria specified?
		Explicit indication for inclusion or surgery

	7d - Maintenance of group allocation

		Free from carry-over effects?
		Cointerventions?
		Confounders controlled?
		Standardized pre-, peri-, and postoperative care?
		Supportive treatment
		Contamination protection
		Free of other bias? Co-interventions
		Co-interventions?
		Compliance?
		Adequately protected against contamination
		Free of contamination/co-intervention?
		Protection against contamination
		Adequately protected against contamination?
		Protected against contamination?
		Protection against contamination?
		Co-interventions avoided or similar?
		Compliance acceptable?

	7e - Reliability of outcome measures chosen

		Reliable outcome measurements
		Reliable outcomes
		Reliable outcome
		Rater agreement
		Multiple raters
		Standardization of study endpoints?

	7f - Financial/other conflicts of interest

		Free of vested interest bias?
		For-profit bias
		Free from source of funding bias?
		Free of source of funding bias?
		Bias due to sponsoring improbable?
		Funding by commercial body avoided?
		Free of sponsor bias?
		Financial support (no financial interest)?
		Vested interest bias

	7g - Early halting of trial

		Free from early stopping?

	7h - Journal where study was published

		Confounding by journal quality

	7i - Characteristics of intervention

		Surgeons' experience with trial operations

	7j - Statistical reliability

		Power calculation

	7k - Other (unclear)

		Characteristics for control site
		Shape of intervention effect pre-specified?
		Follow-up of professionals?
		Knowledge of allocated interventions adequate (Patient satisfaction, health status)
		Free of expertise bias?

X - Inseparable combinations of other criteria

	Adequate blinding of participants, personnel and outcome assessors?

